How leaders can build the green road ahead for transport and logistics - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Environment & SustainabilityHow leaders can build the green road ahead for transport and logistics

June 2024

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

In our increasingly interconnected world, transport and logistics (T&L) play a vital role in ensuring the smooth flow of people, goods, and resources across vast distances, seamlessly connecting people, industries, and economies worldwide. Today, the sector stands at a crossroads as it struggles to balance its considerable emissions and resource consumption with the urgent need to meet ESG (Environmental, Social and Governance) requirements.

Growing environmental awareness, tightening regulations, and pressure from consumers and investors alike are all compelling the industry to reduce its environmental impact. Supply chain vulnerabilities, exposed during COVID-19 and afterwards, are further accelerating the move towards more resilient operations, which are often more sustainable.

ESG risks and opportunities

Currently, T&L companies need to react appropriately to a unique set of ESG challenges in order to remain resilient, sustainable, and profitable. Environmental risks encompass emissions, resource consumption, and climate change vulnerabilities. Social risks include labor conditions and safety concerns. Governance-related risks include regulatory compliance and supply chain transparency.

At the same time, heightened costs can result from evolving environmental regulations, investment in sustainable technologies, adjusted labor costs in line with new operating procedures, and volatile energy prices. We elaborate further on ESG risks specific to the T&L industry in our article “Navigating ESG business risks in the transport & logistics industry”.

Nevertheless, with the right strategies and executives in place, T&L companies can minimize the impact of ESG risks and increased costs on their journey towards sustainability. Now, early adopters can catalyze change by demonstrating the economic viability of sustainability initiatives and thereby triggering industry-wide transformation. In the long run, however, the sector will require a critical mass of sizeable companies involved to achieve lasting change and help the industry capitalize on operational and reputational gains.

The right executives shape ESG transformation

Installing the right executives at the helm can help to steer the organization towards a more sustainable future.

Leading by example, the CEO should personally champion sustainability, encourage its adoption across the organization, and align senior leaders around sustainable purpose and performance. What’s more, they should actively address any shareholder concerns and expectations relating to ESG. They should develop a strategic direction on how the business model and sustainable innovation can advance the company by minimizing ESG risks.

Playing an instrumental role in the allocation of financial resources, the CFO is the person who often gives the green light to sustainability initiatives, ensuring that investments align with sustainability goals and providing resources for related employee training and research and development efforts.

Meanwhile, the COO should uphold rigorous sustainable operational standards and integrate eco-friendly practices throughout the company, optimizing operational efficiency via streamlined processes and advanced logistics solutions.

The CHRO should address labor-related challenges, foster a diverse and inclusive workplace, and actively engage the workforce on sustainability initiatives. Furthermore, they should promote leadership based on curiosity, empathy, and resilience to cultivate a corporate culture of sustainability.

Collectively, the executive board should refine the company’s sustainability strategies and set concrete targets and key performance indicators (KPIs) in line with the CEO’s vision. Moreover, it should oversee the implementation of sustainability initiatives across various departments, monitor sustainability metrics, and address sustainability-related risks. The executive board’s responsibilities extend to risk management, where they assess and address sustainability-related risks and opportunities that may impact the company’s operations, finances, and reputation – and link this understanding to how resilience and opportunities might evolve from new paradigms. By communicating sustainability efforts to internal and external stakeholders, board members can foster transparency and trust.

The supervisory board should provide governance insights to integrate sustainability into corporate governance practices. Board members undertake due diligence to adequately assess and manage ESG risks. They should also help to develop sustainability policies and engage with shareholders and investors about ESG-related issues, encouraging broader organizational ecosystem collaboration.

Combined, these leadership groups foster a comprehensive approach, aligning vision, strategy and governance mechanisms to guide T&L companies towards a more sustainable future.

How Egon Zehnder can help

An Executive Search and Leadership Advisory Firm, such as Egon Zehnder, can serve as an indispensable guide in helping T&L companies to successfully undergo this profound but necessary transformation.

Firstly, Egon Zehnder consultants can leverage their extensive industry knowledge and ESG expertise to help T&L companies understand the terrain. They can help identify where these T&L-specific ESG topics intersect within the organization, pinpointing the specific departments, roles, and responsibilities that can and should drive the sustainability agenda. In this way, Egon Zehnder consultants can provide clarity, enabling organizations to streamline their efforts and allocate resources effectively.

With the roles and responsibilities clarified, Egon Zehnder consultants can then support the organization in identifying and/or developing leaders with the necessary competencies for driving the sustainability agenda. For instance, consultants can draw on their industry knowledge and extensive network to identify leaders with the necessary skills and successful track record in the area of sustainability and connect the company with these leaders to fill crucial positions in the organization.

In addition, Egon Zehnder actively engages in the development of existing leaders within a company, nurturing their ability to lead in a sustainable direction. In other words, sustainability leadership can be cultivated. Egon Zehnder provides targeted coaching and training programs to empower existing leaders to embrace the sustainability mindset and integrate it into their decision-making processes.

Ultimately, sustainability is a collective effort. That’s why Egon Zehnder prepares entire teams via training programs and workshops for sustainability transformations. Its cultural alignment services ensure that sustainability becomes an integral part of the Firm’s culture and ethos. Overall, these strategic efforts can empower T&L companies to successfully navigate ESG complexities and journey along the right road towards a more sustainable future.

For further insights into ESG-risks specific to the T&L industry, please read our article “Navigating ESG business risks in the transport & logistics industry”.

Topics Related to this Article

Sustainability

CEO

CFO

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top