Talent Management Transforms the Management Level - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Talent Management Transforms the Management Level

Best Practice: Talent Management at Allianz SE

March 2025

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

As Global Head of Talent and Leadership at the insurance group Allianz, Laura Marsi is driving the implementation of the talent management strategy. She says: "When talent management becomes a management task, it not only transforms talent but also the managers themselves."

Egon Zehnder: Ms. Marsi, talent management is a management task at Allianz. What does that mean in concrete terms?

Laura Marsi: It means that we see talent management as an important part of the corporate and management culture and take it seriously as a strategic challenge. Talent management goals are consistently pursued and monitored as corporate strategic goals. Our comprehensive talent management strategy and personal development plans for executives and non-executives ensure that personal and professional development is integrated at all levels and that a culture of continuous improvement and growth is promoted. This makes it clear that attracting and developing talent is not just the responsibility of the People and Culture function, as the HR function is known at Allianz. It is also a task for managers at all levels, right up to the Board of Management.

Egon Zehnder: How does this anchoring of talent management in the corporate and management culture become tangible for employees?

Laura Marsi: We foster a strong feedback culture that focuses on the personal and professional development of each individual. Based on this feedback culture, employees can actively and independently drive their own development. This is reflected, for example, in programs such as "Raise Your Hand," which allows employees to register for inclusion in special talent pools with additional development opportunities. Or in our guiding principle "Be the CEO of Your Own Career."

Egon Zehnder: How does Allianz put this guiding principle into practice?

Laura Marsi: We are convinced that continuous learning is the key to personal and professional development. That's why we invest in employee development and offer targeted training for our entire workforce. Allianz's commitment to lifelong learning is not just on paper but is clearly reflected in our goal of providing all Allianz employees with at least 43 hours of further training per year. We want us all to grow together with our company.

Egon Zehnder: What role do managers play in implementing the talent management strategy?

Laura Marsi: Managers at all levels work very closely and purposefully with People and Culture so that together we can actively identify, promote, and retain talent within the company. Talent managers coordinate directly with business partners to define the required skills and abilities that internal talent and new applicants should bring with them. Applicants and internal talent are selected in committees where HR managers and executives make joint decisions in a transparent selection process.

Egon Zehnder: Are all management levels involved in these committees?

Laura Marsi: Absolutely, yes. When it comes to developing talent for management positions, members of the Board of Management, for example, have a say in these committees. This shows how highly the strategic importance of talent management is regarded at Allianz.

Egon Zehnder: Why is this close collaboration in talent management so important?

Laura Marsi: The aim of all talent management decisions and measures is always to ensure the company's long-term success. When we develop talent for the management level, it is very important to us that they understand this connection: Successful talent management ensures corporate success. I am also convinced that when talent management becomes a management task, it not only transforms talent but also the managers themselves.

Egon Zehnder: How is the leadership role changing?

Laura Marsi: Successful leaders today are much more than just managers—they are also coaches and mentors for their teams. If they take on these leadership roles for themselves and develop personally and professionally in this sense, then they are also in a better position to assess the strengths, goals, and development potential of talent. They can communicate clearly and credibly that the development of the employees in their teams is important to them, what they expect from them, and what development opportunities they offer them. The future of leadership lies in the ability to both promote talent and to continuously develop oneself as a manager.

Egon Zehnder: How does Allianz develop these skills and this self-image in its executive teams?

Laura Marsi: We train junior managers early on in social skills such as empathy and teamwork. We have introduced employee surveys and 360-degree feedback, which, in addition to other performance criteria, also assess managers' ability to develop their employees. When selecting talent for executive positions, it is important to us that they have gained a wide range of experience and have taken on managerial roles in various areas of the company. In so-called "career sponsorships," experienced managers also share their knowledge and network with management talent, enabling them to develop more quickly.

Egon Zehnder: You put a lot of effort into talent management. How do you ensure that it contributes to the company's success?

Laura Marsi: We monitor our talent management goals transparently with strategic reports based on defined KPIs. This allows us to recognize exactly: Are we actually succeeding in attracting the best, most successful talents, optimally utilizing their diverse perspectives and skills, and retaining them in our company? Subjective assessments of the skills and potential of our talents are always supported by data and key figures as well as by the assessment of external experts. Internal talents also go through assessment centers from external providers, for example. We do all of this to ensure that we develop the right people in the right direction and thus ensure the company's long-term success.

The Most Important Facts, in Brief:

Allianz sees talent management as a strategically important task for all management levels—right up to top management.

Talent decisions for top executives at Allianz are made together with the C-Suite. Subjective assessments are supported by data and key figures as well as external experts.

The Group relies on a strong feedback culture: managers should give employees both positive and critical feedback to support them in their personal development. At the same time, they should also further develop their own understanding of leadership.

Talent management targets are part of transparent reporting and are consistently tracked and monitored as corporate strategy targets.

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Allianz

Der Allianz Konzern ist einer der weltweit führenden Versicherer und Vermögensverwalter mit Hauptsitz in München. 157.000 Mitarbeiter:innen in 70 Ländern sind für mehr als 125 Millionen Privatkund:innen und Firmenkunden verantwortlich.

Laura Marsi

Laura Marsi ist seit mehr als zwanzig Jahren in verschiedenen HR- und Unternehmensfunktionen bei der Allianz tätig. Als Global Head of Talent and Leadership treibt sie die Talent-Management-Strategie auf globaler Ebene voran und betreut mit ihrem Team die 400 Top-Talente der Gruppe.

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top