Which CMO Skill Is More Valuable: Industry Expert Or Versatile Leader? - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Marketing and SalesWhich CMO Skill Is More Valuable: Industry Expert Or Versatile Leader?

January 2017

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Which CMO Skill Is More Valuable: Industry Expert Or Versatile Leader?

Note: Dick Patton is a former consultant with Egon Zehnder.

Interview of Bruce Rogers, editor and Chief Insights Officer at Forbes.com with Dick Patton, head of Egon Zehnder’s Global Chief Marketing Officer Practice.

Bruce Rogers: Can an executive who is new to an industry effectively lead a company’s marketing function?

Dick Patton: More and more we are seeing major companies entrusting top marketing roles to leaders with diversified industry expertise– not necessarily in the corporation’s direct business proposition. The real expertise driving the talent selection is in finding deep experience in the primary brand or marketing problem to solve. Consider Citi and AutoNation.

Citi’s Chief Brand Officer, Dermot Boden leads brand strategy and ensures that branding and marketing are effective across the world’s largest financial services network. Yet before he joined Citi, Boden had never marketed in the financial sector. He was previously Global Chief Marketing Officer at LG Electronics . Boden had also held marketing roles with Pfizer and Johnson & Johnson.

Greg Revelle, Senior Vice President and Chief Marketing Officer at AutoNation, is a similar story. Prior to joining America’s largest automotive retailer, Revelle was VP of Global Online Marketing for the travel website Expedia. Earlier in his career, he was an Investment Banking Analyst at Credit Suisse.

Bruce Rogers: As the marketing landscape continues to evolve, what should a CEO look for in a potential CMO?

Dick Patton: Intuitively, it always made sense to prize deep industry knowledge in top marketing officers. The common presumption was that a CMO must come up within the industry in which the company competes (or one closely related). In contrast, so much is now changing so fast, the central question many CEOs face is: “Can we change fast enough?” How will the company respond to the digital revolution? Far flung markets? The sudden emergence of entirely new product and service categories? Shifting consumer demographics? Today, CEOs need CMOs who can help make sense of all that is unfolding in the wider world, not just within their own industry. They need CMOs who can be full business partners in crafting and executing a whole new breed of growth strategies.

In an environment that continually compels companies to move in new directions and make great leaps forward, marketers who have spent their entire careers within the company’s own industry may be viewed as bringing “more of the same,” when what the company urgently needs are fundamentally “new” growth strategies. In shaping the spec for their CMO, then, CEOs increasingly put aside traditional considerations and want to know, ”Who is pushing the edge?”

Bruce Rogers: Can you give a few examples of CMOs that are “pushing the edge”?

Dick Patton: AutoNation recognized that a growing number of car buyers (especially millennials) prefer to shop online, and so it sought an untraditional CMO with cutting edge expertise in customer acquisition and e-commerce. Analysts lauded the hiring of Greg Revelle as the right choice to oversee development of AutoNation’s new digital storefront.

When Citi brought Dermot Boden in from LG Electronics, Vikram Pandit (then Citi’s CEO) praised Boden’s “creativity, thoughtfulness and the ability to execute a strategy over the course of a career during which he has contributed to the building of many different and successful brands.” In other words, what made Boden attractive to Citi was not long experience and deep expertise in financial services (both of which he lacked), but rather his proven versatility as a brand strategist and leader.

At Virgin Group, valuing versatility is nothing new. Richard Branson’s sprawling conglomerate spans mobile telephony, travel, financial services, leisure, music, holidays and health & wellness. Virgin CMO Ian Rowden had previously served as CEO of Saatchi & Saatchi Asia Pacific. Before that he was CMO of Wendy’s International as well as VP-Worldwide Advertising at Coca-Cola. In announcing Rowden as Virgin’s Chief Marketing Officer, Co-CEOs David Baxby and Josh Bayliss cited a rationale that transcends industry boundaries: “Expanding the strength and reach of the Virgin brand is at the core of our strategy. Ian has a unique mix of marketing and entrepreneurial experience to help grow our existing companies and develop new markets and industries.” Once again, it was the mix of experience that proved decisive.

Bruce Rogers: How can a CMO breathe new life into his or her role?

Dick Patton: If you spend your entire career as a marketer in one company or industry, you increasingly risk being seen as unqualified to become a CMO – even in your own company. To optimize your qualifications, you must accumulate a range of knowledge and insights that arise from experience working in multiple industries. And in each successive role, you want to always be the one who is breaking new ground. (For example, if you are working for a traditional retail business, pioneer online retailing).

Above all, you must demonstrate that you can navigate and innovatively lead others through territory that is foreign to you because most companies now recognize, their future success is hinged on mastering an environment that is foreign to them.

Bruce Rogers: What embodies the ‘Versatile CMO’?

Dick Patton: A few key traits come to mind:

Respectful persuasion. Personally aligns organization behind groundbreaking vision, yet honors the company’s heritage and existing strengths.

Natural leadership. Effectively leads people who have deeper industry knowledge and experience. Inspires confidence, energy and focus, even while leading organizations through uncharted waters.

Curiosity. Constantly refreshes insight and perspective on an intellectual, experiential and personal level.

Agility. Effectively anticipates changes in market environment. Quickly adapts.

Integration and Synthesis. Blends diverse, previously separate talents and technologies to create entirely new capabilities.

Business orientation. Drives top and bottom line growth. Makes marketing’s contribution to financial performance unmistakably clear.

This article was first published on forbes.com and is republished on this website with kind permission of Forbes.

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top