The Evolution of the Manufacturing CEO - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Ready to Lead the Future of Manufacturing?

Study

Insights from CEOs on Succession and the Leadership Essentials Needed to Manage Complexity

Matthias Bolling

Boston

Download the Full Report

What does it take to be a manufacturing CEO today?

With the extreme complexity and ambiguity of the present, it’s no wonder that CEOs tell us constantly that leading a company is like navigating a Rubik's cube. As one CEO said: “Every week on multiple occasions, I now face situations that I have little to no experience in.”

Because of this, CEOs know they must keep growing and transforming themselves to foster the collaboration and innovation that their organizations depend on. No CEO can be an island of authority unto themselves. They need to keep evolving and adapting to respond to the world around them. Or, as one CEO succinctly put it: “We absolutely can’t have a big CEO anymore.”

In the manufacturing sector, the challenges weighing upon CEOs have been especially apparent: from ongoing trade and supply chain matters to factory floor concerns and trade union issues. And then there are other emerging risks, around new technologies, in particular, as well as the many expectations of environmental, social, and governance matters, not to mention the changing landscapes of diversity, equity, and inclusion.

On top of it all, CEOs today are beholden to a growing number of “louder” and often more polarizing voices of stakeholders vying for their attention and increasingly compounding the complexity of their decision-making.

To uncover how manufacturing CEOs are tackling these complexities, Egon Zehnder and the Manufacturers Alliance Foundation conducted a comprehensive study, blending surveys and first-person interviews. Our findings shed light on the evolving role of CEOs, their preparedness for the challenges ahead, and the strategies they employ to lead effectively

Findings

1

CEOs often praise their appointment process while rating the preparation as merely average.

CEOs often feel adequately prepared but acknowledge the unique challenges of the role, including building a relationship with the board and managing the demanding time and pace of the role. Succession planning emerges as a critical factor, highlighting the need for ready-now candidates and ongoing CEO development.

2

Manufacturing CEOs are increasingly seeking feedback from various sources, with newer CEOs relying more on-board chairs and experienced CEOs consulting their senior leadership teams.

CEOs actively seek feedback from various sources, prioritizing self-awareness and continuous learning.

3

CEOs recognize the correlation between their personal development and growth and organizational growth and transformation.

They prioritize self-awareness, adaptability, and relational intelligence alongside traditional metrics for decision-making. Human-centered leadership approaches, emphasizing empathy and authenticity, emerge as channels for navigating complexity and fostering collaborative cultures.

How does your CEO succession process stack up?

Find out what CEOs said could have prepared them better, who they rely on for feedback and what matters most to them within their organizations.

Download the full report now to learn what strategies have worked for other organizations.

Get in touch with our consultants for expert guidance on succession planning.

Speak with our team

About the author

Matthias Bolling
Boston

Matthias Bolling, based in Boston, leads the machinery, industrial and
technology manufacturing segment in North America for Egon Zehnder.
more

Manufacturers Alliance Foundation is the 501(c)(3) partner of Manufacturers Alliance. The Alliance Foundation provides educational opportunities for the manufacturing community and its stakeholders through insights, events, and tools for today’s most critical business decisions. The Alliance Foundation focuses on talent, technology, digital transformation, and competitiveness. Learn more about the Alliance Foundation

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top