Internal Talent Evaluation for Effective Founder Succession - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

FoundersSucceeding the Founder: How to Best Evaluate Your Internal Choices

November 2024

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Succession planning is a critical process for ensuring the longevity and continued success of any organization. When it comes to Founder succession, the stakes are especially high. So often, the Founder embodies the vision, culture, and strategic direction of the company which makes replacing them a weighty and complicated endeavor. While many Founder-led companies do conduct outside searches for new leaders, they often want to prioritize grooming their internal talent—as potential successors who really know the company and can more seamlessly pick up the Founder’s mantle. Frequently a Founder has hand-picked a colleague as his/her “anointed” replacement. Whatever the case, the choices of internal candidates always come with unique profiles, complete with both advantages and challenges that must be carefully weighed against the leadership mandate. The best selections are usually not abundantly clear until after a thorough, and sometimes extended, evaluation process.

Understanding the Context

Before diving into the evaluation of internals, it is most essential to understand the context in which the succession is taking place. Factors such as the company's current market position, growth trajectory, and organizational culture contribute significantly towards shaping the criteria for a suitable successor. Moreover, the founder's current situation is always a big consideration: Is the succession just standard long-term business planning? Are they ready to move on now? Is this actually not a voluntary changing of the guard? Above all, it is the company’s evolving vision and long-term strategic goals that set the objectives for the succession and have the most profound effect on the selection of candidates as well as the ensuing evaluation processes.

Key Advantages of Internal Candidates

Cultural fit: Internal candidates are already familiar with the company's culture, values, and operational dynamics. This familiarity can facilitate a smoother transition and ensure continuity.

Institutional knowledge: Internal candidates possess a deep understanding of the company's history, processes, and key stakeholders. This knowledge can be invaluable in maintaining stability during the transition period, and it can also steady and support the candidate as they make their way up the learning curve to expand their leadership capacity as potential CEOs.

Employee morale: Promoting from within can boost employee morale and signal to the workforce that the company values and rewards loyalty and performance.

Common Challenges of Internal Candidates

Bias and preconceptions: Internal candidates may come with preconceived notions and biases that could hinder innovation and change. They may have a set perspective based on the Founder’s vision, yet what the company may benefit most from is a fresh point of view. Similarly, the rest of the executive team likely has a bias (positive or negative) to any internal. Positively, this can increase followership; but in the negative it can cause frustration from others and a feeling that the internal is only a pale shadow of the Founder.

Lack of outside expertise and experiences: Unlike external candidates, internal candidates may lack a fresh perspective that can be crucial for steering the company in a new direction. Often these candidates have grown up with the Founder – they were drawn in by the mission or vision. And if this role has been their most formative role, they may also lack a breadth of experience that outsiders often have. For example, an internal candidate could lack the broaden viewpoints that come from working at a partner firm or “adjacencies.” If the internal candidate’s experience is too limited, their purview could be too, and they may may find it particularly challenging to deviate from a founder’s vision and strategy.

Potential for internal conflict: The promotion of an internal candidate can sometimes lead to internal conflict, especially if there are multiple contenders for the role. Careful team planning and transparency are the best means for avoiding negative consequences from this.

Special Considerations for Evaluation

Beyond being generally thoughtful in evaluating an internal in parallel with outside candidates, there are some special considerations and steps that should be taken:

Distinctive leadership: Since internals are following in the Founder’s footsteps, it is important to ask, does this candidate have a distinct persona? Often, we find the internals pride themselves on being a “Founder’s right hand”. But we need to learn who they are in their own right. What is their unique vision and strategy? It’s important to see what this candidate would do differently--it’s a positive to hear their constructive critique of the business status quo. The most impactful leaders ultimately move beyond Founder mentorship and implement their own creative, growth-oriented visions developed expressly for their moment at the helm.

Positioning with internal teams: It is important to get a team view of the internal, but also to review that feedback with the right filter and lens (for example, what is that person’s motivation? Were they also in the running for the role?). An internal candidate will need a high bar of respect and credibility to step into the CEO role. It may make sense to do deep referencing internally to better understand this view.

Explicit leadership development: Many internal candidates may view succeeding the incumbent CEO as “natural,” but this will inevitably be a step change in their development. If they were leaving to go to an “outside” CEO role, they would likely make a deliberate effort to develop and prepare themselves, so how can we do this with an internal succession? This is a time where investing in outside development program (e.g., a CEO cohort program or coaching) can be extremely valuable, so the candidate has time to set a deliberate intention to work deeply on their potential growth into and identity as a CEO leader. A candidate’s willingness to take this on (and particularly if they are proactive in identifying this need) can be a great indication of their curiosity and a growth mindset, both of which are now such critical elements of strong and effective leadership.

Incorporating promising “outside” thought leadership: The internal candidate’s strength is obviously her/his organizational knowledge, but those who will make the best leaders also demonstrate the ability to make sense and use of the most promising perspectives percolating from the external market. This is a critical piece to probe in interviews—to ask how they stay fresh on the industry? Where do they get ideas? Who is on their personal board of advisors and mentors? It is also a consideration for the search committee if an internal CEO needs to backfill their role with an another internal or augment the leadership team with external hires to bring in expanded expertise.

Founder succession is one of the most pivotal undertakings which companies go through. It is never easy to replace the individual who founded, nourished and grew the company, even if it is time. Board members need to be able to find the best successor who can both harness the Founder’s legacy and the one who can embody a new leadership identity fit for the organization’s future.

Sorting through the internal talent to find this best potential new leader is no easy task—it is a nuanced, delicate, complicated process of evaluation. Often the answer is not clear cut and will involve weighing different objectives and risks against each other, until the optimal choice becomes clearer.

In the end, generating a thoughtful, in-depth view of the internal choices, deciding on a successor accordingly, and ensuring they have what they need to succeed is a critical investment in a company’s growth and success for the post-Founder age.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top