Lessons from the World’s Top HR Leaders - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Human ResourcesLessons from the World’s Top HR Leaders

August 2016

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

The Leadership Blog

Chief Human Resources Officers

Back to Leadership Blog

Lessons from the World’s Top HR Leaders

Which companies are best in class in HR today? This can be a difficult question to answer. Much of a company’s success in HR depends upon the unique needs of the organization. But when we interviewed chief human resource officers (CHROs) from eleven of the world’s most admired companies, we discovered key insights that cut across industries. Although the CHROs faced different business challenges, the same themes kept emerging.

Here are six things all of these companies do:

Consistent and disciplined management attention to the talent pipeline

In every discussion we had, CHROs told us how engaged the CEO and leadership teams were with the talent management agenda. At every one of these organizations, leadership took the talent pipeline seriously and consistently made it a priority. Nestlé’s board meets regularly to discuss top talent. BMW and Comcast commit to circulating talent to help enhance individuals’ experience and prospects. Goldman Sachs and Ralph Lauren make sure that their business leaders spend time spotting and cultivating talent.

Listen to colleagues at all levels

Another theme that emerged was paying close attention to the insights of employees at all levels of the organization. One example of this is Bosch. The company allowed younger employees to share their unique skills by implementing reverse mentoring on social media.

Support innovation

While nearly every company today says they want to innovate, the message to “be more innovative” often competes with rigorous short-term targets and key performance indicators.

HR can play a role in helping to mitigate these competing imperatives. For example, when Bosch wanted to focus on agility and entrepreneurship, HR was able to substantially reduce the number of key performance indicators reported to the Board. By focusing metrics on a few areas, they helped encourage creativity.

Provide insight

Many companies are now investing in more sophisticated employee analytics. Integral to this is asking the right questions so that the analysis produces actionable data. At Comcast, a detailed review of unplanned employee absence yielded strategies to recoup almost 1,000 annual job hours back into the system. “HR needs to think about the business impact and analysis of these issues that we haven’t focused on in the past,” Comcast CHRO Bill Strahan said.

Support development

Businesses and markets are changing quickly. To keep up, development opportunities need to go beyond traditional training. At ABB, leaders can move to different business units as well as different countries. The company has a strong recognition that staying in one place for too long can lead to staleness and the risk of plateauing.

Changing approaches to performance management and compensation

Managing performance and compensation is also changing. Ralph Lauren has made its performance review process simpler, with less paperwork and more emphasis on meaningful conversations. BMW also has a simple construct around appraisal which focuses on managing a business, managing others and managing yourself.

Interested in more lessons from these top HR leaders? Read the full paper here.

Contact James Martin at:
james.martin@egonzehnder.com
+44 20 7943 1926

Download as PDF

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top