Under Pressure: How to find a healthy tension in the Chair and CEO relationship? - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Directors & ChairsUnder Pressure: How to find a healthy tension in the Chair and CEO relationship?

March 2025

9 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

It is widely accepted that a healthy tension in the CEO and Chair relationship* is beneficial to a company, its employees, shareholders and stakeholders. Certainly, no one would argue that if these two leaders don’t get along or are not working in the best interests of the company, performance will suffer. There are, of course, situations when a Chair, sometimes newly appointed, must make the difficult call to replace a CEO. And there are also cases when the CEO and Chair are too close, which can lead to all sorts of other issues including complacency. The CEO and Chair relationship is all about finding a way of working together in the context of their respective mandates. However, with the dramatic decrease in tenure in both roles, CEOs and Chairs are confronted with the high stakes challenge on how to find this healthy tension and make their relationship work under time pressure.

* or Lead/Senior Independent Director when the CEO & Chair role is combined

As I put the final touches on this article, the news just came in of another high visibility CEO departure. This CEO had been in place for just under 2 years and was appointed under the leadership of the prior Chair, who then left the role 5 months later. While our analysis shows that this is an extreme case, the overall trend is dramatic. The median “overlap” time of a CEO and Chair “pairing” (or Lead/ Senior Independent Director when the CEO & Chair role is combined) has dropped from 4.4 years in the years up until 2016 to 3.1 years. This decrease highlights the growing pressure under which CEOs and Chairs must establish a working relationship.

And even if you know each other, as often CEOs and Chairs are internal appointments, how can you reengage in a way that will help bring the best relationship dynamics in the context of the new roles?

A healthy balance requires that both sides are strong and work to achieve a common goal. When the CEO is too strong, this can lead to all kinds of strategy and long-term succession issues and a disempowered board. When the Chair is too strong, this not only undermines the CEO but the entire management team. While the CEO should feel they report to the board, and not just to the Chair, there should be a mutual understanding that they are serving the same agenda. CEOs have an information advantage, but this should not be misused, if there is to be a healthy relationship. And Chairs typically have a power advantage and should equally be careful in using the "I can fire you" line. A healthy balance would be for Chairs to make the boardroom a "safe place, but not a soft place" for the CEO.

The Stakes Are High, and The Pressure Is Growing

This article captures Egon Zehnder's insights on what CEOs and Chairs can do to make the most of the time together under pressure. In addition to the quantitative analysis, we share our perspectives from across the world from years of working closely with CEOs and Chairs, through advisory, succession and leadership development engagements.

CEO and Chair Tenure Overlap: Significant Decline Over The Years

We studied CEO-Chair partnerships of publicly quoted companies with market cap and revenue of over $30 billion (as of December 31, 2023), a total of 173 companies. To study the actual overlapping time that CEOs and Chairs have together, we collected start and end dates for CEOs and Chairs (or Lead/Senior Independent Director when the CEO & Chair role was combined) to conduct a Survival analysis. This generated nearly 550 data points of CEO and Chair “pairings” in the period of 2008-2023. This includes both - ongoing and former CEO-Chair "pairings".

While for pairings with start dates up to 2015 the median duration of CEO and Chair relationships is 4.4 years, for pairings with start dates from 2016 the median drops to 3.1 years. This represents a significant decline that is also reflected in an increase in relationships that ended after a relatively brief duration especially in the years 2017 and following. This seems to remain a trend across geographies and industries.

Years of overlap for ended relationships by start date and estimated median duration based on ended and ongoing relationships

Note on data: 173 global public companies with market cap and revenue over $ 30 billion, providing nearly 550 CEO/Chair pairings.

We observe 33% of all CEO departures are for reasons other than planned succession or retirement. Further when the CEO departs, 90% of the cases are when the Chair is new to the "pairing", whereas when the Chair departs, who was new to the relationships has significantly less impact.

This points to an underlying dynamic between these roles that needs to be better understood.

When the Chair is in place and the CEO is new:

This is seen as the more natural situation, as the Chair, having selected the CEO, will have a vested interest in their success. It is also more natural as both sides have made a conscious decision to work together. Whether the CEO is an internal or external candidate, extensive conversations will have taken place in the run up to a decision. This typically sets up the partnership for success, unless the Chair choses to depart soon thereafter, leaving the CEO to start a new relationship with the incoming Chair. In the cases where the outgoing CEO become Chair, it becomes more delicate. We have seen through our CEO succession work, that sometimes the Chair can get in the way of the new CEO really stepping up to the full dimension of the role. The board, in particular the Lead/Senior Independent Director, plays a key role in ensuring this transition process is successful.

When the CEO is in place and the Chair is new:

This is seen as the more complicated situation and if the incoming Chair is not careful, it can very quickly lead to misunderstandings and power struggles. Even if the Chair was on the board and knows the CEO, the dynamic changes when a new Chair takes on the mandate. Also, we have seen that first time Chairs, in particular former CEOs, often expect “too much too soon”, putting pressure on the relationship. If the CEO is given the courtesy to participate in the Chair selection process, at the minimum providing input on the profile specifications, then there is a better chance things can work out for the longer-term. Any sensible Chair candidate will want to meet the CEO before considering the role to discuss the future collaboration, even if they are already a member of the board. It is rare for CEOs to be more directly involved in the final Chair selection, but we have seen this courtesy being extended to strong performing CEOs. However, this can also backfire, with the sitting CEO exerts too much power and influence, or if not careful, overplays their cards, setting themselves up for a difficult start with the new Chair.

What Can CEOs and Chairs Do to Make the Most of Their Limited Time Together?

Under time pressure, the desired “healthy tension” can quickly turn into “negative tension”, when hot topics like strategy, performance, compensation and succession need to be addressed.

In our expertise, the following practices are essential for CEOs and Chairs to make the most of their time together:

1. Trust, Respect and Communication:It’s crucial for the CEO and Chair to have trust, mutual respect and a clear understanding of their respective mandates. They should maintain an ongoing dialogue and a professional distance that is neither too close nor too distant. This can take time to build, so the added pressure of time is not ideal. We have found that regular, scheduled one-on-one meetings and no surprises on either side are essential.

Too often CEOs and Chairs just start working together and get into a dynamic of focusing on the “what,” while they hardly take the time to discuss the “how” and the “who.” They feel they are getting on because of the initial “honeymoon” period, and then suddenly something goes wrong, and they realize they don’t have the relationship fundamentals in place, let alone the trust in each other. In some cases, we have observed a senior board member informally making sure that their CEO and Chair are investing in their relationship. They also act as a “smoke detector” when the relationship is not what it could be, and as a “bridge builder” to bring it back on track.

2. Roles, Intent and Rules of Engagement:

It’s important for CEOs and Chairs to spend quality time in their first meeting on how they see their roles, being open about their intent and the rules of engagement, as well as frequency of meetings, topics to be discussed, and the level of involvement required from each party. Often the agreement is that the CEO leads the company, and the Chair leads the board. This clarity ensure balance, helps avoid power struggles and ensures smooth functioning. However, it is important to go beyond roles and agreeing intent and discussing the rules of engagement. This helps define boundaries and ensures smooth collaboration, as the business goes through cycles or when there are special situations (e.g., M&A, activists, crisis, etc). Some of the best partnerships seems to happen when each side realizes that they have a defined mandate as opposed to an entitlement to lead. We have seen tensions emerge when one party decides to stay longer than previously discussed. It is thus important to revisit roles and intent from time to time.

3. Navigating a complex world together:

There’s an opportunity for Chairs to help CEOs, particularly first-time CEOs, navigate complex situations and unchartered waters such as regulators, capital markets, employees, and shareholders. This includes Chairs and CEOs working together to optimize the composition of both the Executive Committee and the board of directors. We have heard too many CEOs frustrated that their board has not moved with the times and is too backward-looking. And we have also heard Chairs advising CEOs to be bolder and more decisive with C-level changes.

In this context, structured mutual feedback is seen as essential, but it does not always happen, as it requires a real interest in learning, a touch of vulnerability and openness to criticism, which can be difficult for alpha types, who have risen to the top of business circles. Having said this, we have observed that in last decade, CEOs have taken self-development much more seriously and regularly take time for introspection, as in our CEO breakthrough programs. We are now beginning to see Chairs embark on a similar journey if only to remain relevant in their role as someone who can/should provide support and mentoring to the CEO, such as in our Chair Retreats. To our surprise, in our last CEO survey, only 13% of CEOs turn to their Chair for “discussing and making sense of the challenges ahead.”

The Opportunity for Coaching

We have started coaching work with a few CEOs and Chairs keen to invest purposefully in their relationship, but they are currently seen as exceptions. Considering the challenges and the pressure, we expect further engagements of this nature. Sometimes the request comes as part of a new CEO or Chair appointment, or as an extension of a board effectiveness review process. Sometimes it just comes because CEOs and Chairs recognize that they are part of the relationship dynamic and so cannot change it by themselves. In the words one of colleague: “it’s a bit like couples therapy.” Given the high stakes, it looks like the time has come for more CEOs and Chairs to invest in their relationship.

Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank the following colleagues (in alphabetical order) for their time and insights: Jill Ader, Cagla Bekbolet, Lisa Blais, Gaëlle Boix, Ed Camara, Gabi Carvalho, Raphael Czuwak, Peter Flueckiger, Chuck Gray, Sanjay Gupta, Frank Heckner, German Herrera, Clemens Hoegl, Philippe Hertig, Sonny Iqbal, Dominique Laffy, Albert Laverge, Ingrid van den Maegdenbergh, Nina Peters, Andrew Roscoe, Claude Shaw, Ashley Summerfield, Ricardo Sunderland, Lindsay Trout, Johannes von Schmettow and Pam Warren. The author would also like to thank Devyanee Kaushal, Manjari Sharma Shrivastava, Kathrin Heinitz and Megha Sharma for the research, data and analytics support.

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

For more about our approach to helping CEOs and Chairs, please contact:

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top