Ricky Burdett on inclusion as a key ingredient of successful urban life - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Transformational Development ProgramsRicky Burdett on inclusion as a key ingredient of successful urban life

January 2017

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Eradicating social ex­clu­sion with thought­ful urban design

Cities are natural areas of econo­mic op­por­tu­ni­ty which, when properly fostered, result in social inclusion and mobility.

1

The city of the future is facing major social challenges. Demographic change, the pluralization of cultures and lifestyles, and a growing social inequality manifested through spatial fragmentation are transforming urban society from the ground up – and in ways that often ignore a key ingredient for successful urban life: social inclusion.

by Ricky Burdett

THE TRUE importance of the ongoing transformation of urban society becomes clear when one considers that half of the world’s seven billion people live in an urban environment. By 2050, when the world’s population is predicted to peak at nine billion, it’s expected that 75 percent of all humans will live in cities. Already today, the population of cities such as Lagos, Delhi, and Dhaka is growing by over 300,000 a year. In addition to having a profound impact on the planet’s ecological balance, the form that this new wave of urban construction takes will shape the living conditions for billions of people growing up and growing old in cities.

Cities by practical definition are magnets for diversity. They are natural areas of economic opportunity, which when properly fostered, result in social inclusion and mobility – two necessary factors in a healthy urban landscape and society at large. When functioning properly, the city is a machine of sorts that allows people to enrich their lot in life through improved access to education, health care, business, and networking. At their best, cities provide and nurture a civic space that encourages all of these desirable things to happen.

The cost of segregation

Unfortunately, when one travels around the rapidly urbanizing regions of the world in Africa, in Asia, and in Latin America, and visits the centers and the outskirts of cities such as Johannesburg, Lima, New Delhi, or Dakar, one sees examples of increasing exclusivity, with people of one type segregated from people of another. At one end, there is a growing landscape of secluded communities for the wealthy, on the other social housing estates and slums for those at the bottom of the ladder. This is a pattern that is repeating itself across national and cultural boundaries.

Governments, public agencies, and the private sector are driving change to improve the living conditions of existing and new city-dwellers. Unfortunately, in most instances this “change” is sadly outmoded. In Istanbul, for instance, the government is building three million housing units over 20 years, but the rows of bland, 20-story towers surrounded by tarmac are reminiscent of the alienating social housing projects built across Europe and the United States in the mid-twentieth century. They may fulfill a basic human need – shelter – but they are dehumanizing at the same time. Rather than representing a promising trend in inclusivity, they are essentially an alienating ghettoization of less fortunate populations.

As many Western cities are demolishing these impersonal and alienating housing developments due to their social dysfunctionality, these projects are gaining in popularity in many developing nations. Similarly, as many Western nations have grown to increasingly rely on a combination of cultural preservation, increased urban density, and efficient public transportation, developing nations continue to draw on our past mistakes rather than time-tested improvements. As Mumbai attempts to redevelop Dharavi, India’s largest slum, its efforts raise the specter of the 1960s “slum clearance” programs that devastated the social life and urban structure of so many European and American cities. Similarly disheartening is São Paulo’s continuous march toward endless sprawl, with four-hour commuting deemed acceptable in a city that welcomes about one thousand new cars to its streets every day.

In praise of density

These sorts of projects represent a very different trajectory from Baron Haussmann’s Paris or 19th-century London and New York, where people of very different backgrounds lived in relatively close proximity. Just as importantly, the different functions of everyday life – sleeping, going to school, shopping, or going to work – tended to be relatively close to each other. Greater proximity and greater density lead to exactly what cities are good at – mixing together people of different backgrounds. Dense, well-connected, and well-designed cities not only make good social sense; they also make good economic and environmental sense, as they are far more sustainable than sprawl. Suburbia leads to a disaggregation and a fragmentation of city life, which promotes exclusion, poor assimilation, and environmental waste through inherently poor public transportation across unnecessarily scattered destinations (hospitals, housing, schools, shopping, work, etc).

While there is no perfect one-size-fits-all remedy to promote integration and inclusivity in view of obvious cultural and demographic differences among the world’s cities, from an urban design and planning point of view, the well-connected “open city” – here life is lived “on the street” – is a very powerful design tool. If you look at the cities that feel open, accessible, and integrated, it will be because of some combination of these design ingredients, as well as a strong emphasis on public transportation.

Consider the streets of Barcelona, New York, or London: they are not especially similar to one another, but they do share certain key characteristics, such as pedestrian access and public and business utilization at ground level, i.e. retail shops, offices, and public promenades. One is able to walk freely from one urban area to another without having to cross boundaries or gates. These are the makings of an open and potentially democratic city. It is the encouragement of day-to-day social and transactional encounters between diverse groups of people that keeps society going. This is where an inclusive design of the city comes into play. The public spaces of cities – the squares, the parks, the alleyways, and the streets themselves – become the social glue that keeps society together.

Similarly, an open, inclusive city must have a reliable, affordable, and extensive public transportation network. It is precisely in the sorts of cities that are growing so rapidly in developing nations that people must have an open transport system to get to work, and by doing so better their family’s economic future. Public transportation is a critical element allowing everyone to partake in all the advantages urban life has to offer. And it doesn’t have to be luxurious – Bogotá’s TransMilenio is a simple system incorporating buses, but it’s well designed and very effective for moving people around a city of seven million.

Ultimately, cities can both brutalize and humanize people and the environment. Which way they go depends on governance and leadership. If you think of the success of Barcelona or Copenhagen or Rome, it’s because for hundreds of years there has always been purposeful investment in their public spaces. City leaders have an opportunity to make a difference, building on the spatial and social DNA of their cities, rather than importing generic models that cater to the homogenizing forces of globalization. A well-run and designed city represents the nexus of good planning, architecture and local politics. It takes cooperation amongst these disciplines to make real and fairly rapid change. Change at the local level, if inspired and persistent, is not only possible; it’s also quite probable. The rediscovery of the fragile thread that links physical order to human behavior will be the main task of enlightened leadership in a world where, for better or worse, 75 percent of us will soon be living in urban environments.

Ricky Burdett

is Professor of Urban Studies at the London School of Economics and co-editor, with Deyan Sudjic, of Living in the Endless City, recently published by Phaidon.

PHOTO: TUCA VIEIRA

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top