Why The Human Resources Function Has Never Been So Exciting - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Human ResourcesWhy The Human Resources Function Has Never Been So Exciting

April 2025

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

There has never been a more exciting time in history to work in Human Resources than now. The more I talk to Chief People Officers, Heads of Talent, Divisional HR Heads and other HR Leaders, the more I feel they are being called to do more, contribute more, and to step up.

I recently spoke to 100 HR leaders from a global company about why this moment is so pivotal—and why the function needs to evolve as the environment changes. What follows are key insights.

Three Major Trends Impacting the HR Function

1. Increased Complexity

When we at Egon Zehnder, together with our partners at Mobius, run our executive development programs, we often establish on day one of those retreats that "business leadership today takes place in the realm of a Complex (vs. Complicated) world." We use an extract from the Cynefin® framework to explain the distinction between those two realities (see figure below).

For example, while building a rocket and flying it to the moon is actually "only" a (very) Complicated task that can be accomplished if the needed resources and expertise are available, making human-related decisions in organizations often falls into the Complex category. Consider typical HR challenges such as driving a culture of performance and care, or increasing employee engagement, or yet setting up the “right” hybrid work policy. In all these cases, multiple options are available, many things can be simultaneously valid and true, and the way to find a solution often requires more than just having expertise and resources in the room.

The need to navigate such complexity, where simply having good HR processes and policies is not enough, is one accelerated trend impacting the HR function in the post-COVID era.

2. Technology Augmentation on HR’s Impact

While this second macro trend is not necessarily new, it is accelerating exponentially with the development of artificial intelligence and its presence in the workplace. Managed effectively, technology can significantly augment the impact an HR organization can have on any given company. HR leaders I converse with often describe three ways AI is rapidly integrating into their world:

Automation of back-end HR processes, such as employee self-services powered by known HRIS platforms;

Use of data and analytics to support and improve HR decisions such as hiring, nomination to succession pipelines, promotions, and pay;

Talent acquisition as the interface between organizations and external talent pools has received enormous technological investment in the last years—resulting in many tech-powered recruiting solutions which enhance the speed and effectiveness of hiring processes managed by HR.

3. Changing Employee Expectations

The third macro trend encompasses many elements that impact how we relate to work in general and how employees' expectations toward their employers have changed—particularly over the last years. Topics like work-life integration, mental health, Diversity, Equity & Inclusion, multi-generational workforce, new ways of working and organizational culture are some of the key parts of this cluster, which continues to stretch the scope of the HR function in any organization.

Implications for HR Leaders

Effectively leading the People function in organizations across industries today calls for adaptation. As trends keep unfolding, there five key areas for HR leaders to stretch into and keep up with the increasing demands on them:

Ability to navigate dilemmas and manage polarities. As complexity increases in organizations, HR leaders will increasingly face decisions that cannot be solved by processes or policies alone. Rather, these will require sophisticated thinking, asking better questions, facilitating diverse gatherings, and bringing more voices to the table. Coaching and dialogue facilitation skills become crucial for HR leaders in this new reality.

Fluency in data and technology. As AI becomes more prevalent in HR, knowing how to use data to substantiate discussions will set great HR leaders apart from the rest. Therefore, leveraging technology to meet increasing job demands will be a crucial skill for every HR professional.

Exercising curiosity. Constantly learning new ways to perform our jobs is the new normal. This requires active curiosity to explore new technologies and delve deeper into significant topics. HR executives need to be able to hold more than just a superficial dialogue in areas like DEI, organizational culture and mental health, for example, to drive change and support business leaders in their companies.

Showing courage. HR leaders are often seen as the "Chief Emotional Officers" or "Chief Relationship Officers" in their organizations. While showing care and humanity is essential, in today's complex and ambivalent world, guarding values and reminding leaders of their moral compasses has never been as important. In the face of the upgraded mission of the HR function in organizations, HR leaders must therefore show courage by speaking up to toxic behaviors, ensuring organizations stay true to their purpose, and by calling out inconsistencies between discourse and actions.

Knowing yourself and prioritizing self-development. Anecdotal evidence suggests the HR function receives the smallest share of any organization's Learning and Development budget. HR leaders may often feel shy, embarrassed, or not authorized to participate in development programs curated and promoted by themselves. While part of this stems from the very noble and selfless nature of the HR vocation, this needs to change. With increased demands on HR leaders, their development is crucial in terms of leadership, functional, and business-related skills.
As some colleagues and I stated in another article a couple of years ago, titled Transform Yourself to Transform Human Resources, HR leaders need to "put the oxygen mask first" and work on their own personal transformation in order to support the transformation in the organizations they support.

As the title of this article suggests, I genuinely believe there has never been a more exciting time than now to work in Human Resources. The function has earned its seat at the C-level table, the call to action is clear, and the opportunity is there. Now it’s up to each HR leader to rise to the challenge and use that window of opportunity to create real impact.

Topics Related to this Article

Human Resources

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top