Breaking Through as a Hispanic Leader: Cleidy Liborio Fernandes - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Inclusive LeadershipBreaking Through as a Hispanic Leader: Cleidy Liborio Fernandes

October 2024

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

To celebrate Hispanic Heritage Month, Egon Zehnder presents a series of interviews with distinguished leaders, exploring the journeys that shaped their careers and identities.

This edition features Cleidy Liborio Fernandes, Chief Commercial Officer at Logistec. Cleidy is a business strategy professional with over 25 years of experience in key account management, sales,  pricing and operations. In this interview, she discusses the power of mentorship, the fulfillment of fostering diversity in leadership ranks, embracing identity, and the importance of taking a “license” to be happy.

How has your heritage influenced your journey to the C-suite?

I grew up far from the C-suite, in a middle-class family, seeing my father work very hard every day to provide for our family. This mindset of understanding that things are not so easy has pushed me through to reach higher, to aim for bigger things. We need to work very hard, and I feel that this is what drives me day-to-day, at work and as a leader. I like to inspire that same mindset in my team as well because it's something that we will never regret. You either learn or achieve your goal—this is a key lesson I’ve inherited from my heritage.

Did you have any influential mentors who helped you navigate the path to executive leadership?

While I have mentors, I like to find mentors in everyone. Everybody is a teacher to me in certain situations. When I think of people who have inspired me, I usually ask myself: “What would this person do? It could be a teacher, a personality, a politician, or a boss. I like to give credit to everyone – from my family to my teammates and people I meet or my classmates. I get inspired with every act of kindness or problem-solving. And this is what I try to keep in mind. We have endless resources to draw inspiration from.

Did you find it important or inspiring to look up to people with similar backgrounds, like those from Brazil or other Latinos, in higher ranks?

Definitely. If I see anyone succeeding, especially from Brazil, either in my field or not, it makes me proud. I wish we had more Brazilian women in leadership positions. I always wonder about the trajectory of female Brazilian leaders. When you decide to leave your country, you must understand that it’s something you’ll always look back on. That feeling of homesickness will always be a part of your life. So what gets you closer to your home or, like you mentioned, a person that succeeded in the industry living abroad, is something that brings me a lot of pride.

Can you share a proud moment in your career where you felt especially proud of your heritage?

I’m always proud to support people, especially young women from Latin America. Working in global organizations I’ve had the chance to bring together people from different countries and see them grow. For the past 15 years living abroad, I have promoted this culture within this community in the United States. Every time I can open a door, offer a hand, or provide an opportunity, it makes me very proud. I strive to support diversity.

How do you see the future of Latino leadership evolving, especially in the logistics industry?

Latin America, in this industry, is a very important market. Now we see more foreign companies investing and growing in Latin America because it offers possibilities that differ from other mature industries, like Europe, the United States, and Asia. There is more interest in people that understand the ways of doing business in Latin America. Because it's a different “world” altogether. It's a different kind of trust and communication you have to build to get the customers' loyalty. There is a growing demand for leaders who can navigate these nuances, which I didn’t see in the past.

What advice would you give to other Latinos on their leadership journey or to your younger self, especially regarding embracing their heritage?

There will be many challenges, and it is not going to be easy, but you need to remain focused. Be proud of your heritage, of where you have come from, and show your culture as a value to the organization. Use your diversity, your kindness, your way of doing business, and your cheerful personality to bring a new perspective to leadership. Be proud of who you are and be ready for the opportunities, because opportunities don't make appointments, so always be ready to give your best and recognize the tremendous value you bring.

What actions are you currently taking to promote diversity, particularly for Latinos, and is there anything more you'd like to do in that area?

I love to coach and mentor, and I always have three mentees a year, though I wish I had more time due to work, studies, and travel. It is important to give time to mentorship, sharing experiences, and participating in speaking events. Sometimes you can inspire people the same way you get inspired by others who made the same choices in life. We often don't realize the impact we have, so it’s crucial to listen, share, and stay humble, as we can learn from these exchanges as well.

Topics Related to this Article

Inclusion

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top