Working With the Audit Committee: How CFOs Can Win Over Their Toughest Audience - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

CFO & Audit ChairWorking With the Audit Committee: How CFOs Can Win Over Their Toughest Audience

A strong relationship between a public company’s chief financial officer and its audit committee is critical if the board is to provide appropriate risk management and compliance oversight.

December 2016

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

A strong relationship between a public company’s chief financial officer and its audit committee is critical if the board is to provide appropriate risk management and compliance oversight. But that relationship is also an unparalleled opportunity for the CFO to refine his or her communications competencies and gain experience achieving a comfort level with executives at the highest levels of corporate leadership. In our work with both audit committee members and CFOs, we have observed that the CFOs with the best audit committee rapport keep the following five points in mind:

Run toward bad news.

It is human nature to minimize trouble on the horizon. The audit committee, however, counts on the CFO to act as an early warning system—and the earlier, the better. Being proactive and transparent will build trust with the committee that will be essential if a real crisis should ever occur.

Be a business partner.

While the CFO must be on the front lines of risk management, risk management should not define the CFO’s interactions with the audit committee. As a business partner and strategic advisor, the CFO should speak to the audit committee chair at least once a month. Even when there does not seem to be much to report, a regular conversation on the state of the business is likely to uncover important nuances and action points that might have been overlooked.

Curate the information.

Being transparent doesn’t mean dropping unfiltered piles of documentation in the audit committee’s lap. Indeed, precisely because the committee looks to the CFO for clarity, it is important for the CFO to determine exactly what information the committee needs to grasp the underlying strategic narrative, whether that story is good or bad. View the situation from their perspective to see where more background or a deeper dive adds value and where it would be extraneous.

Remember that you’re on the same side.

The audit committee will grill you, seemingly on everything. Their questioning and skepticism can give the exchanges a courtroom-like, adversarial tone. It’s important to remember that the committee isn’t out to defeat you—their goal is to thoroughly understand, to their own satisfaction, the state of the company, management’s underlying assumptions and the risks those assumptions engender. They’re also there as a check on regulation and compliance, both areas where additional pairs of eyes should be welcomed.

Build alliances for when you need them.

As a close advisor to the CEO, there will be many times when he or she will heed your counsel. But now and again, you’ll be unable to make your case on a ma er you feel is of particular importance. Having a solid relationship with the audit committee gives you another avenue to do so—as well as a source of additional insight into the other side of the argument.

Many chief financial officers understandably consider their interaction with the audit committee to be one of the most challenging parts of their job. But it’s designed to be so. The CFO who embraces this fact will find the relationship highly rewarding while also making a considerable contribution to the organization’s governance. It will also make the CFO a better mentor should he or she one day end up sitting in an audit committee chair’s seat.

Download as PDF:

For more information contact:

Arun Dhingra

Arun.Dhingra@egonzehnder.com +1 972 728 5955

Topics Related to this Article

Finance

Board

CEO

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top