Digital Deutschland? - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Digital Deutschland?

CEOs and supervisory board chairs describe the status quo and the levers that will drive progress.

August 2016

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Management Summary

The digital revolution doesn’t merely impact markets and products; companies are also undergoing far-reaching change at many levels. This is giving rise to new challenges, especially for top executives. This study focused exclusively on the CEOs and chairs of supervisory boards of 78 of Germany’s highest-revenue companies, asking their opinion of the current state of digital transformation: where do you stand today (current status), where do you aim to stand (target status) and how big is the gap between ideal and reality?

These are the study’s four key findings:

Mid-stream — transformation is well underway: business leaders have already set their organizations on the path to digital transformation.

Self-critical — transformation gaps have been identified: CEOs and chairpersons name specific “transformation gaps.”

What is important — leadership is key: survey participants now see leadership and culture as the key success factors.

Blind spots — tapping development potential: the study identifies three areas in which CEOs and chairpersons are not paying enough attention to key aspects of digital transformation.

1) Mid-stream — transformation is well underway:

Taking responsibility: Transformation can only take place if top executives assume responsibility rather than delegate it (to a Chief Digital Officer, for example): 68 percent of survey participants reported that responsibility lies directly in the hands of the CEO and/or the chairperson. Transformation cannot mere y be ordered top down, but should grow from within the organization: 67 percent are implementing their digital strategy both from the top down and from the bottom up.

Evolution with tough breaks: Many changes over the past 20 years have happened more slowly than predicted. But when the time is ripe, changes tend to be rapid and radical. Corporate leaders see this process as “ongoing, momentous change” or as a continuous development process that proceeds disruptively.

Survival concerns drive change: There is a widespread fear that those who resist change run the potential danger of losing everything: 79 percent of survey participants cite the “long-term survival of their company” as the primary motive driving digital transformation.

Half haven’t formulated a strategy: Ninety-four percent are strategically active. However, only 37 percent already have a strategy, while 57 percent are developing one and 7 percent have no strategy (Note: total of 101 percent due to rounding).

2) Self-critical – transformation gaps identified

Leaders acknowledge their own deficits: Corporate leaders in Germany know that they have not achieved the targets they set themselves and are critical of their own shortcomings. When polled on strategy, culture, competencies, cooperation, monitoring of competition, organization and their own management style, managers see a clear difference between their current status (53 out of 100 points) and target status (80 out of 100 points).

Board shortcomings: Leaders take a critical view of the competencies possessed by their boards (65 out of 100). Supervisory boards score even worse (46 out of 100). CEOs and chairpersons assess their own competencies related to digital transformation as only slightly below those of their boards (63 out of 100).

Closer alignment needed: Cooperation between boards and supervisory boards in matters regarding digital transformation did not receive high marks (57 out of 100).

Reluctance to change: Only slightly more than half of survey participants are already working with start-ups (59 out of 100) or have founded their own incubators (40 out of 100). These are sobering figures in light of the need to construct digital ecosystems to replace traditional value creation chains.

Staff deficits: The CEOs and chairpersons surveyed see the biggest deficits in staff competencies (transformation gap of 31; current status: 44 points and target: 75 points), followed by corporate culture (gap: 28; current status: 46, target: 77) and “organizational orientation / change” (gap: 26; current status: 51, target: 77).

3) What is important – leadership is key:

The right leadership is crucial: Leadership is the lever that ensures the success of digital transformation (62 von 100), with corporate culture in second place (55 out of 100) followed by technological aspects.

Top-down and bottom-up: In light of the massive upheavals, all levels of the company have to be on board. Accordingly, (see above) 67 percent of the companies surveyed are implementing their digital strategy both from the top down and from the bottom up, with direct responsibility in the hands of the CEO and the board.

Actively changing culture: Top executives (see above) also consider culture to be very important. After staff competencies, they see this as the second-largest area for improvement.

4) Blind spots – tapping development potential:

Expanding horizons: CEOs and chairpersons consistently assess their competitors as underperforming their own company. In this context, however, none of them cite potential disruptors from the digital world such as start-ups. Their focus has remained on their traditional competitors.

More critical self-awareness: Survey participants also identify room for improvement in their own leadership style, but they all see the smallest transformation gap here (gap: 15; current status: 59, target: 74).

Acknowledging digitization’s importance: Although the topic is relevant to the company’s very survival, the different aspects of digital transformation do not play a key role in executive board recruitment (52 out of 100). The gap is even greater (35 out of 100) when it comes to appointing supervisory board members.

You can access the entire study (in German) at www.egonzehnder.com/de/insight/digitales-deutschland.

Digital Deutschland? – CEOs and supervisory board chairs describe the status quo and the levers that will drive progress (Introduction and management summary)
Download as PDF

Topics Related to this Article

Digital

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top