The Future of Mobility: Uniting Software and Hardware with Autosoft - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Mobility & AutomotiveThe Talent Perspective on SDVs: Uniting Software and Hardware in an “Autosoft” Culture

October 2024

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

The Seismic Shift Towards Software-Defined Vehicles

Traditionally, the automotive industry has been highly successfully at attracting talent. For decades, graduates regularly named automakers as top employers. In addition, the industry has successfully developed an ecosystem of academic joint ventures to foster innovation and ensure a strong talent pipeline.

In recent years, the automotive industry has transformed amid a seismic shift towards software-defined vehicles (SDVs). For drivers, SDVs promise to become the ultimate connected mobility device, with perks such as automated driving, integrated services and personalized entertainment. Remote software updates and added features will enable a car to improve, rather than deteriorate, over its lifetime.

It’s therefore no surprise that SDVs are at the forefront of the car industry’s thoughts, concerns and expectations. Inevitably, both challenges and opportunities lie ahead. A true tech company thinks and acts completely differently from a legacy carmaker. Yet these two need to speak the same language if they are to understand the rules of this new game and moreover, win at it.

More than One Route to Success?

Numerous hurdles lie ahead as OEMs strive to marry the old and the new, merging the tech world with that of legacy carmakers. For a start, major technical decisions and standards are not yet in place. In terms of progress, different automakers are at varying stages of their SDV journey. Early adopters started pursuing software as a strategic priority a decade ago.

Meanwhile, those who joined later wonder if others have already won the race or if there is still time to catch up. Certain OEMs might have already overstepped the mark, struggling to set up dedicated entities to build fully-fledged software capabilities. Some are proceeding more cautiously, taking a step-by-step approach to expanding their know-how. Others have chosen to rely on small teams. As one CEO of an auto-tech software company said, “It only takes 20–40 people to develop a good core software stack.”

Even after adapting their structures and successfully hiring top talents, automakers struggle to retain software leaders. What can they do to achieve their strategic goals and set up their teams for success?

Egon Zehnder has conducted a series of interviews with leaders at OEMs and tier 1 suppliers in Europe, US, China, Japan and Korea. These interviews reveal the latest industry developments and underline some common themes to show leaders the best route forward.

Strategy Is the Starting Point

As we know, “Culture eats strategy for breakfast.” However, this does not mean that culture comes first. A company first needs to set its strategic direction before it can derive the right organizational structure and cultural norms to achieve that strategy.

For decades, car companies have started by understanding market requirements before deriving product roadmaps. They developed architectures or platforms and then developed vehicle models. This will not necessarily change in an SDV-driven world. However, the teams performing these tasks must have a comprehensive systems understanding. Understanding both hardware and software will enable them to develop architectures that set the right boundaries for future vehicles’ characteristics.

The core value creation for OEMs used to be complete vehicle understanding, vehicle integration capabilities and mastering the complexity of development competitive propulsion systems. With increasing powertrain complexity, the rise of advanced driver-assistant systems and the shift towards more software, the playing field is now changing.

When OEMs realized that software would become one of the core competences going forward, some initially aspired to own most of the software creation. More recently, some OEMs have focused on architecture and a few fundamental stacks. As with classical components, they derived a clear make vs buy strategy.

Rebalancing Hardware and Software

Based on their strategy, leading car companies have substantially adapted their R&D organization, e.g.,

❙ Establishing strong architecture functions, combining hardware and software teams for a comprehensive systems understanding

❙ Rebalancing the top-level domain structure. ADAS and Infotainment have risen to the top level, while some traditional domains have been combined

❙ Introducing overarching responsibility for vehicle functions, sometimes in an additional matrix dimension, next to project leadership and module responsibility

How can companies successfully recruit, retain and develop successful teams to achieve their goals? We see three key elements: boldly aim for the best talent, build a new culture, and master the transition.

Leaders’ Educational & Career Background

Functional heads for vehicle architecture, ADAS, infotainment, cloud platform, AI, battery and charging

Be Bold and Aim for Top Talent

Historically, automotive leaders boast a world-class engineering background but lack substantial software experience. However, some of the newer OEMs have successfully managed to introduce the same level of excellency in software know-how. Many have also brought leading-edge software know-how into the executive management team.

In addition, they have managed to adopt a more differentiated approach when hiring software leaders. They carefully select who they should put in charge of which area, for example choosing candidates with deep systems integration understanding for architecture or a B2C software background for infotainment. They have started to build similar cooperative models between industry, academia, and start-up communities to develop stable talent pipelines.

Culture Is Make-or-Break Factor

Decades of successful engineering of high-quality vehicles shaped a hardware-centric culture that is a world apart from that of software. A car part was designed, built and then couldn’t be altered. A sophisticated system of engineering, testing and validation processes excelled at delivering complex products in a safety-dominated industry.

In contrast, the software approach is often based on recurring revenue models, with software updates improving a vehicle over its lifetime, as with smartphones. In future, a second-hand car in many ways should be a better vehicle than the one that originally left the factory.

Leaders now need to bring both of these worlds together and merge the best elements of two contrasting cultures. However, this cultural integration and collaboration will only work if there is commitment from the top and leaders are 100% on board. In other words, the C suite, ideally comprised of executives from both auto and software backgrounds, needs to find a common ground, identity and purpose, combining the best elements of a traditional automaker with those of a software company to create a new type of hybrid, “autosoft” company.

And leaders need to win both employees’ hearts and minds, combining technical and strategic objectives with an emotionally appealing transformation story.

Marrying the Old with the New

It’s clear that what worked in the past won’t work in the future. Nevertheless, traditional automotive heritage, expertise and experience still needs to be honored. Hardware experts are just as relevant today as they always have been.

Going forward, this valuable hardware expertise needs to be combined with sophisticated software strengths, skills, and competencies. In other words, for this cultural transformation to work, all hands need to be on deck. Joint teams, combining hardware and software know-how not only at the top, but on function or module level, will perform better if trusted, empowered to take decisions in a “take risks, fail fast” approach, all within the architectural boundaries.

Lastly, process-related and individual KPIs need to be aligned with strategic targets, just as individual performance management dimensions need to be adapted to targeted cultural norms.

Talent, Strategy and Leadership

In summary, it’s crucial now for OEMs to commit to the right strategy and organizational structure towards successful SDV development.

It’s also crucial for OEMs to identify and hire the right talents. Car companies need to create a new software-based talent ecosystem, such as the one already in place for “classical” engineers.

Finally, leaders need to adapt to the new culture. Automotive board members, many of whom rose to their position thanks to their experience and expertise, now have to lead people who are experts in areas that are totally unfamiliar to them. As a result, they need to adapt their leadership style, adopting a trust-based mentality, empowering combined teams in a less hierarchical way and allowing them to take risks to “fail fast.”

By following this threefold approach, OEMs can take advantage of a unique opportunity to merge the best elements of two opposing worlds, driving into the future with a new “autosoft” culture and leadership.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Technology

Talent Management

Culture

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top