Scaling Sustainability Efforts: Insights from Roberto Marques - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

SustainabilityPioneering Sustainability: A fireside chat with Roberto Marques, Former Chair and CEO of Natura &Co.

July 2023

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

With sustainability in its roots, Natura’s foundation is built on the idea of reconciling socioecological sustainability with profitability. We had the pleasure of interviewing Roberto Marques, the former chair and CEO of Natura &Co, a purpose-driven group of iconic brands including Avon and The Body Shop. Marques spearheaded the transformation of Natura to a truly global, omnichannel business that has sustainability as the guiding force behind all it does.

It was inspiring to hear about forward-looking ideas on how leaders can break old paradigms to foster collaboration rather than competition, the notion of reconciling sustainability and profitability as one, and how leaders should embrace humility, self-awareness, and intellectual curiosity as levers for meaningful progress.

During your time as CEO and chair, how did you continue to foster Natura’s deep sustainability focus and commitment among employees, especially as the company scaled into new markets and made some major acquisitions?

Natura believes that companies have a license to operate in society, and not the other way around. I was lucky enough to join the company, and it became a dream to expand and become an enterprise. Our acquisitions, such as The Body Shop, Aesop, and Avon, were driven by sustainability principles. The focus was to embed sustainability at the core of these companies’ strategic planning, and that’s how we started to see traction in this purpose.

When you have to make sustainability and profitability decisions, those two things can coexist.  Sustainability drives innovation. A lot of products are based on the notion of more sustainable sourcing, recycling, circularity in the economy, which consumers want to buy now. And people want to work for companies that care about those things.

It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy. The more you embed sustainability in your core strategy, the better you'll be able to reconcile how a company can be more sustainable and profitable.  There is a belief from Anita Roddick [founder of The Body Shop] that truly resonates, which is that business could be a force for good.

As you were scaling sustainability efforts in the company across multiple brands, did the sustainability goals ever have tension with business objectives?

Were there challenging moments in the board and involving suppliers and scaling solutions? Yes. But because sustainability goals were embedded into the scorecard of the company, we could hold the company and the board accountable. When we set the scorecard, we could track progress on each of the individual companies, but equally important we are looking at progress, especially in the environmental and social dimensions. That is key.

Are there key competencies or qualities that boards should possess to oversee and drive the integration of ESG into the core of a company's sustainability journey?

Humility, intellectual curiosity, and believing in science are critical qualities. Boards shouldn’t be afraid to seek help. There is a vast ecosystem of scientific resources, organizations and technology to help companies across all sectors move in that direction and establish a good baseline. Ask, “What's going on, what's the baseline, and how do I get help?”

At Natura, even with our vast knowledge, we brought an external company in to teach us how to establish an emission baseline on Scopes 1, 2, and 3, and each one of our companies works in a very different way of understanding how to navigate that.

It's pure and simple. There's no plan B, only plan A. We have to start making the right decisions and start incorporating sustainability in order for those businesses to continue to exist, attract employees, and sell to customers.

How did you leverage diversity and inclusion to drive better sustainability outcomes in companies, employees, and communities?

As we were expanding, it became very clear that we needed talent with different backgrounds and experiences. People with the notion of being uncomfortable all the time, not afraid to dream big, and understand that sustainable growth is as imperative as addressing sustainable injustice, particularly in developing countries that are not able to figure this out on their own.

We also intentionally partner with our competitors because if we can't scale up solutions in packaging, for example, we cannot move the needle. This coexistence was unimaginable in the past, but it’s how we drive common solutions in the same industry to scale things up now.  Diversity of thinking and openness to challenge ideas is critical.

For boards that haven’t embedded sustainability into their work, what would you like them to know?

Sustainability is coming like a wave, and there's no way back. Companies need to understand how to stay relevant with their consumers and how to attract talent. We need to make sure that board members understand that, and that sustainable growth leads to innovation. Then it becomes much easier to spark that curiosity to drive the agenda. Additionally, there's enough data to show consumers are making decisions on companies and products based on their approach to ESG. B2B is also important for Scope 3 emissions.

In your view, which function of a company is best suited to embed sustainability into the daily life and DNA of a company?

Supply chain and R&D. All innovation needs to be driven with these teams. At Natura, every scientist has a calculator to understand the impact on the environment. They know exactly what's going to be the impact on the environment before they develop the formulation. We have scientists in the Amazon Forest talking about biodiversity, engaging the community, and we work on supply chain solutions at scale.

Are start-ups and smaller organizations able to do a better job of baking in sustainability at their core? What could larger enterprises learn from them, and vice versa?

Natura is just one successful example, and there are other great examples of companies doing even better. Ultimately, sustainability is not a one-company, one-sector solution. It is about the power of the collective. It needs to advance from an ecosystem’s perspective. There exist a lot of rules and regulations that need to be challenged, and solutions need collective planning in the same sector by forming coalitions, not in isolation. The times when CEOs and chairs were rewarded by being successful while others fail are gone. That notion will dictate the most successful companies, countries, and individuals.

Topics Related to this Article

Sustainability

Leadership

Inclusion

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top