The Trapping of a Founder - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

FoundersThe Trapping of a Founder

May 2023

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Here’s an anxiety dream: You’re driving a high-performance sports car out onto a busy super highway. You use all your skill and cunning to maneuver yourself though the pack until you’re out in front, racing ahead, a clear winner. You’re feeling great.

And then it hits you: This highway has no exit ramps. You must drive this car, at this breakneck speed, forever.

This is the nightmare of some successful Founders. After victoriously envisioning, creating, funding and launching a company, forces conspire to keep them in that same leadership position forever, even as the role of leading the company evolves and changes from creator to builder to sustainer.

Many Founders are spectacular at founding, but some are less well-suited to the next-generation roles. Unreasonable expectations that force Founders into these roles create difficulties for everyone – the company, shareholders and, perhaps most dangerously, the Founders themselves.

At Egon Zehnder, we’ve watched this negative trend of Founder Trapping proliferate in the market over the past two decades. Generally, it is rooted in three key assumptions:

That a Founder is well-suited to not just be a builder and a creator, but also a professional manager.

That he or she will have the learning agility to grow as a leader as quickly as their organization is growing.

That Founders even want these type of leadership roles.

But how did these unfair assumptions take hold?

It’s our hypothesis that fundraising rounds are the main structural force that has been driving this trend over the last two decades. Cheap and available money has led to endless cycles countless VCs, and ever-mounting pressure to net the highest dollar-value rounds. Founders find themselves caught in a cycle of fundraising with the VCs honoring “the Founder magic.”

Pair that trend with another cultural reality: Society idolizes founders, often referring to their vaunted status as "cult of the founder." Would a VC be as willing to invest in a professional CEO in the same way they would a wunderkind? Perhaps more so today, but that hasn't been the norm over the last 15 years. The power of the cult of the founder was strong for a long time.

This is made all the more difficult by the visibility of notable unicorn Founders-turned-CEOs such as Larry Ellison, Jeff Bezos and Mark Zuckerberg. These unique individuals have set an unrealistic precedent. They have helped to perpetuate the myth that long-term commitment is the noble path. In short, historically, we’ve rarely celebrated the idea of Founders passing the torch. Rather than being positioned as practical or even celebratory, it’s questioned to signal a failure.

This insistence that Founders remain at the helm has two distinct negative outcomes, among countless others:

The financial problem: There is now data that supports that, while pre-IPO, on average, Founder-led companies outperform those with non-Founder-CEOs. However, that difference diminishes just three years post-IPO, after which Founder-CEOs actually start detracting from firm value.

The human problem: Being a Founder requires a lot of tenacity and courage. It is the loneliest job. It can also be very unhealthy, both physically and mentally. Have we forgotten that Founders are people, too, who are vulnerable and are mere mortals, just like the rest of us? Why have we strayed from simply honoring the Founder's creative genius to demanding they be superheroes?

It is part of our mission to help Founders achieve their vision in ways that play to their capabilities and interests – serving both their personal and professional goals. We don’t believe in the notion that there’s only one path forward. Rather, we want to help Founders pave the way for their best possible outcome.

While every situation is unique, often we’ll work with Founders in the following capacities:

Facilitating Self-Discovery: We assist in an intensive personal diagnostic on strengths and motivations – a “Founder, know thyself” exercise. This can help achieve clarity on both natural and desired leadership styles. We partner with the Founder to deep-dive into issues of legacy and developing a view of impact beyond the company they’ve built. We support this very personal self-discovery with 3 steps: a private 1:1 discussion on the Founder’s life foundations and entrepreneurial narrative; a psychometrics mapping of his or her personality factors; and finally, a Founder Debrief and Dossier – a summary of our insights into one’s motivational drivers, tendencies and competencies, and evolving identity.

Hiring for Complementary C-Suite Roles: We leverage the Founder’s self-reflection process to design role specs and identify talent who can complement their areas of energy and strength. We dive deep into understanding how Founders build trust to ensure any “founder complement” hire is set up for success and de-risked and use psychometric tools to map similarities and differences to facilitate conversations of how they may be complementary and/or redundant in co-leading the business.

Succession Planning: We partner with the Founder to create a roadmap for a sustainable leadership model – one not dependent on them. We map scenarios of different roles they can play, aside from CEO, that brings impact to the business, joy to themselves and also empowers leaders who can further their legacy. We help Founders envision “what’s next” and think deeply about “what’s left undone.”

Board Planning: We believe in the value of Independent Directors as they can bring in fresh perspectives and bridge dynamics between Founders and Investors. We advocate for appointing Independents earlier in one’s journey. This can also help forge a pathway to transition out of day-to-day operating. We can help recruit these directors and/or reconstitute the board pre-IPO.

Ultimately, Founders should be valued – not vaulted. Rather than trapping the Founder, our goal is to find, develop, and foster leadership in authentic ways and enable Founders to serve their best impact.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top