Resolving Founder Fear: An Emotional Rollercoaster - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

FoundersResolving Founder Fear/Fearless Polarity

Confidence and fearlessness seem to go hand-in-hand for Founders. But the new emotion of fear can emerge once the succession process begins.

January 2024

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

One often-unexpected reason that a succession grinds to a halt: Founder fear.

Fear is not usually an emotion associated with Founders. If anything, the opposite is the norm. We view Founders as inherently fearless. And this is true. As entrepreneurs, they exhibit great courage and take great risks. Founders ignore the naysayers. They are willing to launch products early and pivot to achieve perfection later. They are action-oriented when others would pause, afraid of failure. They will bet it all – both literally and figuratively. We had one client who gambled the fledgling company payroll on roulette in Las Vegas – and won! Confidence and fearlessness seem to go hand-in-hand as Founders are determined to manifest their vision.

But something happens to many Founders when the succession process begins. They start to worry that everything they have worked so hard to build – everything they risked so much to achieve – will slip away. That’s when the new emotion of fear creeps in. It can crowd out the familiar bravado. And it can interfere with a smart succession process, paralyzing a company in a nether-space of uncertain leadership.

The key to resolving the Fear/Fearless polarity is understanding what succession means to a Founder. While it’s a business process for most everyone involved, for a Founder succession, it is deeply personal. It is the evolution and transformation of a dream.

A conversational blueprint for Founders and succession

Because the issue of succession is so personal, it demands a personal approach. To that end, Egon Zehnder has developed a guide for Founders and succession teams. It is not a checklist, but a conversational blueprint that helps to unlock and support Founder curiosity, establish a connection between the Founder and the succession process, and tap into the confidence and fearlessness that made the enterprise what it is.

Questions 1-4 reach out for the core emotions the Founder experienced creating and build the company.

1.    Why were you motivated to build this company?
2.    What are you most proud of as an entrepreneur and why?
3.    What matters most to you about this company?
4.    What is precious about the culture?

Question 5 names the elephant in the room – the emotion so in contrast with the Founder’s reputation.

5.    What are you most afraid of with the transition?

Then, 6-10 surface a shared vision for the Founder’s next step.

6.    What does success look like under the new leader?
7.    How do you envision being involved in the future?
8.    What specifically do you hope will be your legacy?
9.    What are you looking forward to doing beyond the company?
10.    How can I best help you achieve your vision and mission?

This is hardly a one-hour conversation. It goes deep and it may take time for the Founder to move through the memories and emotions the questions evoke. But it is crucial ground work.

Succession is an important crossroads for a Founder. That individual, even post-succession, will likely remain involved as a member of the Board. Acknowledging the polarity of the Founder experience will bring next steps into focus. Exploring the emotional underpinnings now, and making them part of the succession process, will help to build a positive, fearless future for the company.

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top