Focusing human aspect of Leadership - Seattle Survey Insights - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Leadership ProgramsSeattle Leaders Are Embracing Human-Centric Leadership

A survey of 200 Seattle area leaders reveals a desire for a greater focus on the people side of the business.

February 2024

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

In Seattle’s dynamic executive landscape, characterized by performance and innovation, a noteworthy leadership trend is on the rise: leaders are increasingly embracing the human aspect of leadership.

A recent Egon Zehnder survey asked 200 Seattle area executives about the complex issues and leadership challenges they face in their day-to-day roles. The results show that leaders want to focus on the human aspect of leadership—by fostering development and personal growth opportunities for themselves and their teams.

Seattle Leaders’ Wish List

What would executives do if they had the tools, resources and support to perform their role more effectively? Our findings show that Seattle area leaders would dedicate more time to the people side of the business. Specifically, 45% would focus on creating meaningful personal and social connections with colleagues, 42% want to ensure a better work/life balance for employees, and 41% want to mentor and sponsor other employees.

In addition, leaders understand the need to continuously develop a culture that is grounded in humanity, looking out for their employees and supporting them so they can succeed in their roles. They signaled the desire to build and foster a psychologically safe environment for their teams, with 47% intending to encourage open communication, 45% wanting to celebrate professional and personal achievements, and 44% focusing on being more empathetic to colleagues’ problems.

Combatting Loneliness with Trust

Many executives may appear to be extroverted and connected, but the truth is, there is a lingering feeling of loneliness at the top. The pursuit for more development opportunities and better tools to create psychologically safe environments may be deeply related to a major pain point: they are unable to ask for help. Our survey found that more than 2 in 3 executives (67%) haven’t asked for more support to avoid appearing unfit for their roles. For more than a quarter (28%) this has happened multiple times.

The issue may be with trust, as executives want a close friend or sounding board that understands their circumstances. In fact, a confidant is the number one thing executives are looking for to be more successful (43%), followed by more access to leadership development programs (42%), help navigating changes outside the company (40%), and better communication with their teams (37%).

Despite the need for a confidant, companies are not putting mentorship programs in place that could help. While nearly two-thirds of Seattle area executives (64%) have someone they would call a mentor at their company, these are largely informal relationships – less than a quarter (22%) have a mentor formally assigned.

Another critical area of improvement is valuable feedback. Few people can fully appreciate everything executives must consider in their positions, which can result in feedback that is surface level only and lacks insight. According to our data, when executives receive feedback, it often isn’t actionable because it comes from people who do not understand their roles or responsibilities (42%), or it contradicts previous work or practices (41%). Others struggle with too few people providing feedback (37%), the feedback is too specific to be useful (33%) or it doesn’t come in a timely manner (32%).

Self-Guided Development

It is not just mentorship that many executives must line up on their own. Oftentimes companies expect their leaders to pursue self-guided leadership development opportunities rather than through formal programs (46%). Only 55% receive formal leadership development programs from their company, which is a positive trend we expect to keep growing.

Whether self-guided or more prescribed, 100% of the executives we surveyed agreed that leaders who do not actively develop their leadership skills will be unable to adapt to changes in the world around them.

Transforming Leadership in a Vibrant Business Community

Seattle is a vibrant business community, poised for significant future growth. Renowned for its innovation and forward-thinking leadership, the city's 200 surveyed leaders amplify a global trend: Human-centric leadership emerges as the transformative shift within organizations worldwide.

Beyond the veneer of technological and business prowess, Seattle area leaders are driven to foster meaningful connections, combat loneliness with trust, and embark on development journeys. They are aware of the need to feel empowered to confidently steer their organizations toward enduring success and sustainable value. This is grounded in their deep sense of humanity and care for people. To manifest this vision, intentional efforts toward leadership and team development become the critical next step.

Since the opening of our Pacific Northwest office in downtown Seattle this past November, with an upcoming office opening in Vancouver, British Columbia in early 2024, it’s the first time a leadership advisory firm is present with physical offices in both locations. We are captivated by the profound sense of community in this region and eagerly anticipate cultivating lasting relationships with leaders who spearhead innovation, navigate disruptions, build dynamic teams, and beyond.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top