When Leadership Means Learning: Twilio’s People Strategy in the AI Era - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Human ResourcesWhen Leadership Means Learning: Inside Twilio’s People Strategy

Christy Lake, Chief Administrative Officer of Twilio, discusses how leaders can build trust, capability and confidence in times of rapid change and when learning becomes a real leadership skill.

March 2026

7 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

We’re in an upskilling era where companies grow but headcount stays flat because AI boosts productivity. That tension will need to break.

Christy Lake

Chief Administrative Officer at Twilio

Leadership today is unfolding in real time. Technology is advancing faster than roles can be rewritten, and leaders are learning alongside their teams. Authority no longer comes from having all the answers but from creating the conditions for others to learn, adapt, and grow.

In this edition of Egon Zehnder’s CHRO Voice series, Christy Lake, Chief Administrative Officer of Twilio, shares what it takes to lead through uncertainty, from building trust in a remote-first world to navigating AI adoption and shifting career expectations. Her perspective is clear: Discomfort often signals growth. In times of rapid change, trust becomes the foundation for experimentation, learning, and resilience.

What does it take to be a great People leader in today’s environment?

Through the years leadership has evolved from command-and-control to empowerment and collaboration to now deeply human and empathetic management. The rise of AI in our work means that as CHROs, we’re not only expected to lead, guide, support, and develop people through these new ways of working; we also need to upskill, retool, and leverage the same technologies to excel at what we do.

It feels like a brave new world where many things can, should, and are being done very differently, which can be deeply uncomfortable. This shift coincides with a period of historically low attrition rates, whether due to “job hugging” or other factors. So, there’s this tension: We know we need to embrace new ways of working, but honestly, it feels daunting.

Play

How do you keep people first while addressing potential fears about new technology in a remote work environment?

We went remote during the pandemic and decided to remain committed to that path. One of the pillars of our approach, which we call Open Work, is connection. We believe that focusing on building and sustaining connections in a remote world is the only way to create the trusted relationships needed to get work done. We emphasize this constantly, even surveying employees quarterly on whether they feel connected at the team level, with favorability scores consistently being in 80-90th percentiles.

Our focus has been on creating a culture that supports creativity, experimentation, and innovation in a high-trust environment, while ensuring people feel supported. We also focused on democratizing AI learning and reducing fear, making it fun through things like hackathons where all teams, including nontechnical roles, can participate. We provide safe parameters, training, and a learning community to lower the barrier to experimentation and shift mindsets from “I want nothing to change” to “I’m willing to try.”

What are some signals that a CEO is truly committed to being people-first?

For me, the clearest indicator is intentionality. Developmental activities, giving feedback, spending time with new hires and tenured employees are tangible signals. I’m fortunate to work with a CEO who truly lives this. The say-do ratio is evident in the time he invests in talent reviews, individual career conversations, as well as in our ongoing discussions about culture. These aren’t annual check-the-box exercises; they’re part of the natural course of business.

The deeper impact happens at the philosophical level: aligning on big questions: Are we building talent internally or buying externally? How do we think about mobility, time-in-role, and culture—who we are today and who we want to become? Everything flows from those conversations—budget, programs, policies. That’s where the most meaningful (and fun) work happens.

We’ve all worked in environments where “people-first” was a headline, but the real test is whether leaders invest time and resources.

Christy Lake

Chief Administrative Officer at Twilio

Should the HR function lead the charge on AI literacy and champion new tools and technology?

HR absolutely can lead, but it should be a partnership. Enterprise tech often owns systems and platforms, so decisions about investments need to be made collectively, and our legal team has developed guidelines for using AI responsibly. From an enablement perspective, this is both change management and reskilling, which is our bread and butter in HR. We can drive cultural aspects, like making adoption feel safe, and lead the skilling piece across the organization.

Play

Where have you seen some success in experimentation with new tools, specifically AI?

There are several areas. First, AI embedded in our products has driven great success with customers and how we position our platform. Internally, the biggest wins have been in highly repeatable, knowledge-based work, such as customer support. Our internal chatbots effectively answer employee questions and suggest next best actions. We also have an AI agent handling 95% of our inbound customer leads successfully. Other strong use cases include procurement and contract redlining, where we train LLMs on a knowledge base and apply them to repetitive tasks. These applications have unlocked significant productivity for individuals and teams.

What’s been the biggest challenge in getting teams to adopt AI as part of their workflow?

Early on, the biggest challenge was figuring out what we could and couldn’t do, and where to engage responsibly. Once that hurdle passed, the next challenge was data. AI is only as good as the data it’s trained on, and if your data is scattered, outdated, or inconsistent, results suffer. Many organizations, including ours, have had to clean up old policies, consolidate repositories, and ensure data is well-organized and tagged.

Looking ahead, how will AI reshape roles and career progression over the next 3–5 years? Will linear career progression still exist?

For at least the next two years, the external market is not very robust, and low attrition means tenure is increasing. That brings benefits, such as deep knowledge and relationships, but also challenges. Most of us grew up expecting that learning new skills leads to a promotion or role change, yet I see a pause. For now, simply keeping your job often means upskilling because expectations are rising, companies grow but headcount stays flat because AI boosts productivity. That tension will need to break. What happens next? New jobs will emerge as they always do in these cycles. Roles we can’t fully imagine today, like “agent managers” overseeing AI systems, will create fresh opportunities and unlock growth. I can’t predict exactly what they’ll be, but a shift is coming.

How are you ensuring that learning and development on your team and across the organization remains cutting-edge?

Last year, we invested in building a skills infrastructure to support our career growth and development framework. We implemented an AI-powered platform to identify existing skills within the organization and track emerging skills in real time. I’ve seen data suggesting the shelf life of skills is now closer to 14 months. Having this infrastructure helps us understand what skills are needed, what we have, where the gaps are, and how to close them. AI plays a big role in surfacing that insight. This investment is foundational: first, put the systems in place; then learn what we have and what’s happening in the market. From there, we can connect gaps to learning and create a data-driven approach to upskilling.

In a very dynamic time in our lives and in organizations, what advice would you give to new CHROs?

My biggest advice is to identify the critical few priorities that deserve your attention and separate them from the longer wish list. My CEO often says, “What needs to be an A, and what’s OK as a C?” If you inventory all the work in the function, you’ll find a long list of things you’d love to improve. But chasing the long tail can distract from what matters most for the business, culture, and employees. There’s an art to focusing on high-impact priorities and putting others in maintenance mode. We love all our programs and policies, but sometimes it’s okay if they don’t get all your attention. That’s a skill you learn over time. If I could give myself advice starting out, it would be: don’t chase everything equally; focus on what truly drives impact.

Explore our candid conversations with HR Leaders from some of the world's most recognizable companies, sharing real challenges and impactful solutions.

Get the Insights

Topics Related to this Article

Human Resources

Culture

Technology

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top