Navigating Change: HR Leadership in Evolving Landscape of Work - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Human ResourcesHow HR Leaders Are Navigating the Rapidly Changing Landscape of Work

January 2024

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download PDF

Egon Zehnder recently gathered Human Resources Leaders from Indonesia’s top companies for an open and insightful dialogue on the trends that are shaping the future of work in an ever-evolving landscape.

HR leaders from companies in digital services, financial institutions, telco, retail, among other sectors, shared perspectives, exchanged experiences, and collectively explored strategies that will steer HR practices into the future. Workplace trends discussed by these leaders – from technology adoption and remote work adaptation to talent acquisition and retention strategies – have the transformative potential to redefine how organizations operate in the evolving landscape of work.

Without a question, the shift to remote and hybrid models, which is deeply related to employee engagement and productivity, remains top of mind and key subject of discussion for our attendees. It’s no understatement to say that the COVID-19 pandemic completely upended how and where people do their work, and many organizations are still following a remote work policy.

What It Takes to Have a Successful Hybrid Work Policy

Navigating the dynamic landscape of hybrid work, trust emerges as a cornerstone, as encapsulated by one leader’s insight:

There is a lot of trust in [Hybrid Working], and this goes back to a very honest conversation with the leaders on intent.

An HR leader from one of the financial technology companies in Southeast Asia

This underscores the critical role of transparent communication and understanding between leaders and employees, permeating diverse aspects, from flexible policies acknowledging individual responsibility to proactive measures like coaching managers for effective collaboration in the evolving work environment.

Even retail companies are embracing hybrid models, as revealed in our discussion with HR leaders. However, for sectors with a prevalence of frontline workers, such as banking branch offices, in-person work is favored to minimize gaps between senior leaders and frontline staff. A pervasive sentiment is that trust, coaching, and mentoring managers on setting expectations are pivotal for success. Attendees also emphasized practical considerations, like developing tools for tracking in-office presence and expanding meeting room capacity for video calls.

Amid ongoing discourse on hybrid work, however, some leaders lean towards a full-time return to the office for all employees. A potential compromise to that, as one HR leader highlighted, is the adoption of “hubs,” providing satellite locations closer to home—a move aligned with reducing commuting time and supporting ESG objectives by minimizing the carbon footprint.

How Technology Can Spur Efficiencies for HR Leaders

As the world of work undergoes a transformative shift towards hybrid work arrangements, the role of technology also becomes increasingly critical. In this context, the impact of artificial intelligence (AI) on HR processes takes center stage. As such, HR leaders are not only navigating the complexities of managing a workforce with diverse location preferences, but they are also exploring how to harness the power of AI in HR operations. Simultaneously, HR leaders must proactively manage the organizational impact of AI adoption, including initiatives such as workforce reskilling.

Participants described how they were using AI to create tools in areas such as performance management, decision-making, and customer services. One leader, from one of Indonesia’s largest digital services companies, detailed how their organization was now using AI to respond to customer complaints, rather than human agents. But HR leaders also sounded a note of caution on the new technology. Specifically, one participant said AI should be used to create models to help the person make a decision, rather than depending on AI to make decisions for them. In that vein, he advocates not to force AI into every potential use case – “It’s not something that we have to adopt just for the sake of adopting it.”

As organizations harness AI to optimize HR functions, the discussion naturally extends to the area of talent acquisition and retention strategy. A central question integral to any HR strategy revolves around the trade-off between buying external talent or building internal talent. Participants weighed the pros and cons of each approach.

Effective talent development involves fostering engagement, loyalty, and patience, requiring substantial investment in internal employees, as highlighted by one leader. Another participant emphasized that building talent is a valuable strategy, enabling younger or less experienced individuals to gain exposure across different areas, fostering mobility and creating a cohesive and nurturing company culture, akin to a family business. Having clarity of business needs is key.

We talked about buy or build, but we can also borrow talents…

An HR leader from one of the leading family-owned company in Indonesia

“… Depending on the industry, business size and cases, we need to have understanding on what we want, in order to decide on buy, build or even borrow talent. In the long run as family business, we also must think about longevity – where we would like to have 4 generations in 1 organization - 20’s, 40’s, 60’s, 80’s”, explained by the HR Leader.

However, acknowledging the immediate needs of specific high-level skill sets, an HR leader advocated for the occasional necessity to “buy” talent, providing a swift solution to pressing challenges and facilitating rapid growth. The consensus among participants was that both building and buying talent are valid strategies, each serving distinct purposes—building for long-term health and sustainability and buying for immediate problem-solving and growth acceleration.

Shaping the Future of Work in Indonesia

Reflecting upon the productive discussion, HR leaders are adapting to evolving paradigms and are in a strategic position to influence and shape the future of work – which will impact not only their organization, but also the larger community.

Topics Related to this Article

Human Resources

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top