Economic Uncertainty, Consumer Budgets and Labor Shortage - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

CFO & Audit ChairEconomic Uncertainty, Tighter Consumer Budgets and Labor Shortage

CFOs on What’s in Store for Retail

November 2022

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

With the holiday season near or upon us—depending on whom you ask—we wanted to find out how retailers were preparing for the final quarter of the year with the shadow of a recession looming over them. Egon Zehnder gathered a group of eight CFOs and NEDs from public retail companies to share how they are planning for the end of this year into 2023 as they tackle inflation, a sporadic supply chain and a labor shortage.

Top Concerns: Restructuring, Inflation and Supply Chain

Expense reductions were top of mind for many of the CFOs at our gathering, and most of their planning involved a mix of SKU rationalization, reducing headcount, and finding supply chain efficiencies. “We’re not trying to burn the furniture to make a number, but we want to set ourselves up for a lower cost structure next year,” explained one CFO.

Brands over-ordered based on last year, but the demand is very different now. Even if consumers buy well, there will still be a glut, which will create some interesting price pressure.

--Retail CFO

Several CFOs noted that they had recently gone through a restructuring or were in the midst of a transformation, which put them in slightly more stable positions compared to some of their industry peers. “We’ve already gone through a restructuring plan, and now we’re nimbler than before,” said a CFO. He added that his company has expanded its gross margin committee, which focuses on areas of opportunity in sourcing and product costs, to an inflation committee—the other big topic on CFOs’ minds.

While some retailers have been able to pass some of their rising costs on to customers or find expense reduction offsets, many believe their customers are approaching, or have reached, their limits. “For the last year to year-and-a-half, you could pass through some of these price increases,” one retail CFO said. “Now some companies have to bear them, and they’re trying to be creative about how to reduce costs, but it’s becoming
more surgical.”

In addition to inflated pricing, companies also have to contend with a 180-degree turn in supply and demand from the 2021 holiday season to 2022. With rumors swirling that there are containers of merchandise sitting in shipping yards because retailers don’t have room in their distribution centers, it’s less likely that demand will exceed supply this year. “Our market has a ton of inbound product coming in,” one CFO said. “Brands over-ordered based on last year, but the demand is very different now. Even if consumers buy well, there will still be a glut, which will create some interesting price pressure.”

For discount retailers, this extra product could create favorable conditions. One such company CFO noted that there have been good buys from an inventory perspective, but they have also seen a spectrum of resilience and willingness to spend across their brands. “For our lower-income consumers, with higher gas prices and the highly promotional environment, we are not able to increase prices,” a CFO explains. “Instead, we’re focusing on gaining market share.”

Part of the reason for the abundance of product this quarter is that many companies over-ordered due to sporadic supply chains that left demand high and inventory low last holiday season. To combat that, a retail CFO shared his company moved up their production calendar by 10 weeks, which they enacted 18 months ago. This enabled them to get ahead of any delays in the supply chain and to catch a tailwind from air to ocean transport. Other CFOs noted they are still waiting to catch those supply chain
tailwinds—many retailers have fixed contracts so they will need to await renewal to realize those benefits.

Other retailers don’t have the same urgency to move product by the end of the year. One CFO shared that her company is still digging out of demand. “It’s not a bad problem to have but affordability is a factor for people trying to buy used vehicles,” she says.

Planning Amid a Looming Recession

With mixed signals about a recession and the accompanying scale of related repercussions, planning is complicated, to put it mildly. A CFO and board member shared that she was part of a recent gathering of compensation committee chairs where several discussed having both first half and second-half plans for the year. “Boards are showing a willingness to use discretion,” she explained. Another CFO added that it’s difficult to go to the board saying you want to plan in six-month cycles without seeing the major signs of a recession. “It could be the steepest recession we’ve seen since 2009, or we could be pulling through cyclically,” he shared.

Things are changing so quickly—in 2009, you could see the fundamentals of the economy coming down, but now, employment rates are high, and people are still spending—the question is when does it drop out?

--Retail CFO

Despite the concerns for the next year, expanding footprints and rethinking the future store experience were two areas of focus for many of the CFOs at our gathering. “We have to expand our footprint,” explained a CFO. “Our ability to serve small to large fleets requires as many dots on the map as possible.”

Another footprint consideration is rethinking the purpose of and experience in stores. “The optimal number of stores to have and the interior format of your store—now is a time to see if you can revamp if you can do it in a capital-lite way,” a CFO said. “Companies will be more innovative about product and consumer experience where they can without spending a lot.”

A Hole in the Labor Force

An ongoing struggle for retail companies has been the labor shortage for stores and distribution centers. Companies have had to get more creative about how to displace labor and lower requirements for employment. “We need to be thoughtful in the interview and vetting process,” a CFO said. “We want good workers who lean into the brand and have strong customer engagement skills and so we need to build labor inflation into our P&L.”

Another CFO added that her company is working to leverage automation investments in stores to deal with the labor shortage, including more self-service options. “Anything we can do to become more efficient,” she explains.

Retail Revolution

Just as retailers had to adapt during the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, the pressure is on to find continuous ways to evolve and mitigate the impacts of a potential recession and other looming crises. No one pretends to know exactly what 2023 has in store, but there is general consensus there will be multiple challenges to navigate, including what companies are already dealing with—rapid inflation, labor shortages and inconsistent supply chains. With 2022 looking to wrap up as a relatively lackluster holiday season, the CFOs on our call agreed that taking proactive steps to prepare for an extended period of inflationary pressure and softer customer demand in 2023 is key.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Finance

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top