Adapting the Board to New Paradigms: The Example of Web3 - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Technology & AIAdapting the Board to New Paradigms: The Example of Web3

July 2022

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Editor’s Note: At Egon Zehnder, we have had the privilege to partner with our clients to build world-class boards for almost 60 years. Since 2016, we have brought this expertise to Blockchain, Crypto, and Digital Asset companies, or today generally referred to as Web3 companies, to help them attract the best talent to the boardroom. Along the way, we have gathered insights on what founders and CEOs have found most helpful and what matters most to build a supportive group of directors who can navigate through the complexity of a nascent space and truly enhance the performance and governance of the business.

The world of blockchain and crypto has been perceived in the past as the Wild West, unconstrained by regulation and scaling at an incredible speed. This early phase is gradually coming to an end, superseded by a second phase that is more institutional, sometimes regulated, and includes not only Web3 companies but also traditional institutions, who are figuring out how to play in this space.

An intense competition for talent has started, as all players are looking to attract leaders who can cut through complexity, build a vision and scale in tech-led environments. But for Web3 businesses, finding executive talent is just half of the battle. Building a board of directors who have the experience, capabilities, and mindsets to operate in new, rapidly changing and sometimes decentralized environments is a major challenge for CEOs and founders alike. These companies need board members with a good understanding of the Web3 space and with a solid background in governance, finance, digital transformation, or regulations. Moreover, expertise in scaling a fast-growing business is highly desirable. Through our work with those companies, we have observed that, when it comes to choosing non-executive directors, there is more to consider than experience and expertise. Three key elements play a critical role in making the right appointments: flexibility, independence, and integration.

A flexible mindset

The best board members exhibit certain core capabilities—the abilities to be continuous learners and to translate concepts from one space to a completely new one. Web3 companies and products are new, so directors need to be able to rely on experience but be open to challenge themselves to chart a new path. “If you go from traditional finance into the world of future finance, you need to enjoy being out of your comfort zone,” says one Web3 leader.

Some Web3 players have swayed too far toward the traditional sector-specific skillsets. This comes at the expense of the understanding of the business, culture, and frankly speed.

– CEO of a Web3 company

Given the volatility in the market and the speed at which successful Web3 companies have grown, the leadership needs to constantly redefine their needs and priorities.

A founder of a digital asset company says: “The digital asset adoption has reached a new level. Our business has experienced tremendous growth in just this past year, which even in our most optimistic scenario we hadn’t foreseen. I realize that in the current stage of our company, our board needs to shift its focus from the early start-up days where we had to set up an initial basic organizational structure towards how to scale the company in a rapidly growing global business.”

Independence matters

Having independent directors on your board is one of the hallmarks of good governance. Board members who do not have a personal stake in what happens and can see things objectively are an important sounding board for emerging companies. However, most Web3 company boards don’t have independent directors. Their founders or CEOs tend to favor directors with “skin in the game.”

In addition, boards also sometimes over-index on blockchain capabilities, with nearly every member of the board serving on another digital asset board or in an executive capacity. However, this thinking is taking a turn as the market is maturing. One founder and CEO of a digital asset company told us: “I needed my supervisory board to transition as we considered going public. I needed someone with the expertise to chair an audit committee or to chair a remuneration committee. I realized I not only needed the crypto native people but also those who understand how to steer a public company. I was too subjective with my own network and needed to bring in outside thinking and diversity.”  We have observed that, in the best functioning boards, each board member role is clearly defined, specifying the capabilities and experience needed that creates a set of directors with diverse and complementary thinking styles and decision-making.

Independence is especially important when it comes to the board chair. Ideally, the chair is not the founder or an investor. The chair should be an independent member of the board who is skilled in advocating and balancing an array of different stakeholders. A master of complexity with a low ego, s/he will often play a mentoring role to the CEO. Therefore, it is also helpful if this person has been part of a growth journey as an executive, so they understand the pressures and demands of scaling a company.

Learning together in the boardroom

Board members do not need to have all the answers. “Today, I cannot expect all board members to have the complete skillset we are looking for,” says a founder of a digital asset company. “It is our responsibility to ensure that they can follow the market. We needed to define a dedicated plan for them to stay close to the latest trends and developments in blockchain and related technologies.” It is not only about appointing a person to the board but also supporting them and making sure that they further develop in their capacity as directors of a Web3 company.

With customer-friendly and interoperable infrastructure still being built and a regulatory landscape that is constantly evolving, there is a high level of ambiguity that is inherent to this industry. Therefore, successful board members must be comfortable with more unknowns than they may have seen in former roles. The Web3 board benefits from learning across generations, industries, and journeys. Finding the right mix of directors who can translate ideas across experiences, offer independent perspectives and encourage innovation that will enable Web3 companies to expand, allowing a consumer-driven, fast-paced market to flourish.

Topics Related to this Article

Board

Finance

Leadership

CEO

Digital

Blockchain

Technology

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top