In Conversation with Shiva Rajaraman, VP of Product, OpenSea - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Technology OfficersWhat’s Next for Product

In Conversation with Shiva Rajaraman, VP of Product, OpenSea

February 2023

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Shiva Rajaraman’s Product journey spans across some of the most iconic companies and products that we all use and love today. Currently, he is the VP of Product for OpenSea, the world’s first and largest web3 marketplace. Previously in the web2 world, he has logged years in Product Management for Spotify and Google. Before coming to OpenSea, he was VP of Commerce for Meta. He also acknowledges stops that were different in hindsight: He was Chief Technology Officer for WeWork (“As seen on TV,” his LinkedIn bio quips. “No regrets.”). Shiva and I connected on his insightful journey in the Product space as well as his foresights on what’s to come as we are on the “cusp of a Cambrian explosion.”

What was your path to Product?

A big part of my path to Product was just curiosity. I didn't even know what "product" was early in my career. I was meandering in analytics, research, and a startup. I just wanted to build things and keep the pace of learning high. There were times I missed aspects of school life. I regretted not studying or learning things in school that I was most passionate about. Eventually I ended up in a role where I shipped things. The first moment I shipped something that people started using was one of the happiest moments of my career. I'm still chasing that feeling continuously.

"The first moment I shipped something that people started using was one of the happiest moments of my career. I'm still chasing that feeling continuously."

Shiva Rajaraman

Overtime, after many new roles I grew as a leader at YouTube, getting exposed to great managers, peers, and team members who rounded out my perspective. I learned about looking ahead a few steps to building an ecosystem, not just a feature. I learned the art of deeply caring about and influencing and supporting product design, and going beyond the product into how we market it and how to build a community. I still learn things every year; and now I get more of a chance to teach which I enjoy quite a bit.

You’ve led Product across so many formats. What do you see as the common traits for successful Product Managers and successful Product Teams?

It may seem obvious but great Product leaders and teams spend a lot of time in the product itself. Effective leaders role model attention to detail, commitment to looking a few steps out, and prioritize whatever matters to create the best product: design, speed, utility, enjoyment. They understand their best users and spend time with them where feasible. They understand where they are – in steady state vs. inception. If you’re in early stages, you can change your model to less A/B testing and more opinionated problem solving. If you’re in steady state, ask yourself whether the next step is an iterative improvement or is it important to achieve a step function? What are your users using instead of you? What adjacent problems can you solve? What trends have come into the landscape that are likely going to lead to your disruption.

It may seem obvious but great Product leaders and teams spend a lot of time in the product itself.

We're seeing a lot of new things happen now such as the rise of generative AI that are either going to be cataclysmic events for companies or opportunities to leap forward with bigger bets. Great Product teams and leaders ask themselves: Now that this is possible, what can I do differently and better? Or: Now that this new capability exists what unique advantages do I have to make this a strategic play for us and our users?

What about more established companies, even FANG? What can they learn from the emerging new ecosystem tech products like OpenSea and vice versa?

More established companies often have builders too disconnected from people and their key use cases. Engineers, designers, and product teams overall tend to be too disconnected from the people they serve. When they operate through user research, often the cycles are long. They trust the logs too much and excuse contrary anecdotes. They lose the muscles necessary to apply or commercialize research into real product bets. Emerging tech products need to have this continuous pulse and be able to iterate quickly to product market fit while holding a high bar for comms and activation. This means smaller teams are empowered teams where all functions come up with ideas and speed of iteration is prioritized , as opposed to established processes or functional bloat and approvals.

Emerging tech products need to have this continuous pulse and be able to iterate quickly to product market fit while holding a high bar for comms and activation. This means smaller teams are empowered teams where all functions come up with ideas and speed of iteration is prioritized.

What elements of Product thinking would be useful for all leaders, including CEOs and executives?

Some key things all CEOs and executives can benefit from:

Take any feedback you get from a customer, partner, lost prospect and root cause it. Ask those “5 whys” and get to the problem crisply and clearly and solve it in your org or at the company. Cracks are plentiful and small. Go to the source of that erosion and design so it doesn't happen again.

Understand that your customer is evolving faster in today's world. Information flow, product choice, access to new services in new forms is 100x what it was a decade ago. This means leaders must ask themselves: Just like your app needs to change every week is your org also changing? Do you have the skills you need? Do you have the urgency? Do you experiment with different orgs like you do products? Are you agile and focusing that agility on the problem to be solved for the customers you serve? No one needs another "labs" team that is just there for employee retention. People want to have impact.

Care about every touchpoint with the attention you give to the product itself. Is your blog useful? Is your marketing effective? What's enjoyable about being your customer beyond the product? Iterate and test beyond the product and give teams ownership and accountability for excellence and impact across all functions.

Looking ahead, how do you think the Product function is likely to evolve in the next five years?

Prior product revolutions were driven by platform evolution, such as mobile. Going forward, people in Product are going to have to better understand infrastructure and technical limits and opportunities deeply in order to perform. We're likely on the cusp of a Cambrian explosion of apps given the new platforms emerging such as AI, web3, AR, new wearables. These combine with ubiquitous powerful computing power. We'll also see a push towards leaner, efficient organizations again and that will be exciting for many PMs who thrive in "full-stack" ownership and working deeply to solve problems or create awesome experiences.

To be successful, Product will need a better understanding of the business, not just the process of creating great products.

The other area PMs will need to shine again is understanding revenue and especially profit levers in a post-cheap capital world. We've seen this play out before too when the world shifted from desktop web to mobile. In that period, PMs emerged that became experts in revenue/yield optimization, designed new ad formats that worked on small screens, and developed mobile friendly checkout, payments, and conversion designs. It’s possible this new era will emphasize even more urgency on profit levers and doing more with less. To be successful, Product will need a better understanding of the business, not just the process of creating great products.

Topics Related to this Article

Product

Technology

Digital

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top