In conversation with Mads Johnsen, Chief Product Officer of Calm - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Technology OfficersThe Path to Product

In conversation with Mads Johnsen, Chief Product Officer of Calm

May 2022

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Mads Johnsen is the Chief Product Officer at Calm, where he leads product and growth teams. He took the role in 2021 after stints at Uber, LinkedIn, McKinsey and Nokia. While his titles have changed over the years, his work has always been in service to product. He spoke with Egon Zehnder’s Anna Auerbach about the ways in which the product role has evolved.

What was your path to product?

In my teens, I quickly realized that software development fits my temperament quite well. I love how quickly you can move from idea to prototype.

That interest led to my first job at Nokia as a software engineer, followed by an MBA and a few years in management consulting. My path to product has been anything but linear, but I frequently draw on all my past experiences to execute my current role.

I'm now leading product at Calm. It feels full circle. I started my career back when mobile devices were “connecting people.” Two decades later and our technology has unfortunately also become a source of anxiety and stress. I'm excited to be in a place where I can put our amazing technology to use to make the world happier and healthier.

What do you think is the biggest misconception about the product function?

The biggest misconception is that the product role has a clear definition of success. There is a common belief that the product leader is the “CEO of the Product” but when I ask CEOs what they expect from their product leaders, they usually stumble and end up talking vaguely about communication and vision. Revenue or any other hard financial target never comes up.

Meanwhile, I've never met a CEO that had any ambiguity about the financial target they were expected to meet.

It's crucial as a leader to have clarity on what role you want the product organization to play. It can range from general management to project management and anything in between.

What do you look for in product talent?

I look for three things:

Intellectual curiosity: Great product managers have an instinct to question things that others accept as the truth.

Strong desire to win: Too many product managers are solely focused on keeping everybody on the broader team happy. I look for product leaders who push teams to win.

Ability to get stuff done: I value high productivity and hustle. I rarely look at formal education and years of experience.

What is the future of the product function?

I wonder that myself. As more and more industries move into software, I anticipate the overall need for product managers to continue to grow. Many industries have just started hiring product managers.

Within the consumer high tech space, highly sophisticated product analytics capabilities have become commonplace and created an environment where product leadership often looks purely at engagement and a/b tests, far removed from business outcomes. This is unsustainable, and I think we will see consumer product management move back to become accountable for overall business metrics in addition to the consumer experience. We will see the PM becoming the GM.

It should be a fun journey. I’m grateful to be on it.

Topics Related to this Article

Product

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top