Investors Target Growing Opportunities in AgriFood Tech - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Technology & AIInvestors Target Growing Opportunities in AgriFood Tech

As the AgriFood Tech sector increasingly gets more visibility and higher dollar amounts, here’s what investors and talent should consider when tapping into the opportunity.

October 2022

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Food tech, once the under-funded, under-rated, decidedly un-sexy corner of the investment world has emerged on the main stage with a bang. According to the 2022 Agfunder AgriFoodTech Investment Report, venture capital investors pumped more than $50 billion into agrifood technologies in 2021, an 85 percent over 2020.

During our participation at the 2022 Future Food Tech conference, we were impressed by the new ideas emerging in product and production methods. This mirrors the behavior of consumers, many of whom are changing their personal preferences to focus on nutrition and sustainability.

In this article, we examine why this industry segment is teeming with new investment options as well as the opportunity for talent to step up and be part of this growing, secular trend.

Our takeaways on AgriFood Tech today

Sustainability + Digital & AI is the combo to draw investment dollars.

We’ve seen an evolution in the way investments in this space are assessed. On the one hand, it’s not just about the numbers anymore. It’s also about the purpose. From early to growth investors to private equity funds, we hear the term “sustainability” often, and oftentimes as a core piece of their investment thesis. On the other hand, most investors are seeking a digital and AI component to these investments, understanding the power that this gives to build moats and scale a business model. A good example of this is AI powered vertical farming – the practice of growing crops in vertically stacked layers. Vertical farming supports water and land conservation and allows for a reduction in chemicals used in food production. Further, robots and AI enable these farms to operate as autonomously, efficiently and to be as productive as possible. Look at vertical farm company Plenty, who secured $400 million in funding earlier this year with Madison Group and JS Capital as lead investors, with Softbank Vision Fund 1 and strategic partner Walmart also participating in the round.

Investment scope is broadening.

The investment scope is broader than ever before. In terms of stages, investors are going up and down their comfort zone to fund early-stage pioneer startups and do follow-ons on promising growth opportunities. In terms of business models, we see a range from brick-and-mortar stores to ag-tech, to big food companies to food tech being funded. In terms of technologies, while in the past the investment opportunities were focused on genetics, pesticides and fertilization, now additional areas such as digitization, data science, and alternative farming are drawing greater attention. Finally, we are seeing non-traditional investors getting more active in the space, such as the example of Walmart above.

Post Covid-19 issues may loom as a threat to growth.

While most of the news around agrifood tech is promising, it’s important to understand the challenges the category faces. The Covid-19 pandemic put a spotlight on the global matrix that supplies everything including food. Investors in the food-tech space will be looking hard at the supply chain challenges in the industry. What is the future of global vs. local in terms of production of food and value creation? The pandemic was a painful reminder of how global this segment has become and how current events continue to put pressure on globalization.

The Implications for Talent

What are the implications for talent of this massive capital allocation into agrifood tech?

For Funds: Seek fluency in Sustainability + Digital & AI, risk-taking mindsets, and operating experience

Funds will need to acquire or develop talent fluent in digital & AI and sustainability, as well as the traditional financial and operational experience. That means recruiting investment professionals who are not only fluent in the wider ag industry, but also understand the rapidly evolving implication of the digital & AI revolution and the sustainability demands. These teams must be able to identify and vet new teams, early in the product launch cycle, and be adept at entering unknown territories that will be created by innovation. It may also mean creating or expanding an operating support team that has the experience to help founders navigate the complex and unknown journey to scale.

For Portfolio Companies: Invest early in your team

As investors are making bigger, bolder bets on this sector, they increasingly rely on the quality of the team as a diligence component vs. the proven tech/product or market opportunity, which can oftentimes look unclear or daunting. Hence, to be differentiated, companies must make early investments to bring the right talent on board and prove investors you have what it takes to execute on your big vision. An important note is to consider your point of differentiation and build talent around your future, not your current needs.

For Individuals: Get on the AgriFood Tech bandwagon ASAP

Individuals have an opportunity to invest in their future potential growth by turning their focus to the agrifood tech industry and building the skills that are and will be in demand in this arena. The mandate to individuals is powerful: The future of our human race will depend on the growth of this sector. So, jump on the bandwagon and learn what are the complexities and opportunities facing this sector, find an area to go deep and specialize on, and make yourself a valuable asset for those building and funding the food revolution ahead.

Topics Related to this Article

Technology

Sustainability

Marketing

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top