The Power of Coming Out of the Closet - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Transformational Development ProgramsThe Power of Being Out

The more we come out, the more change we can affect.

October 2022

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

I wish I had come out of the closet at work years earlier than I did. I didn’t realize how much energy I was wasting pretending to be someone I wasn’t. Coming out helped me step into a more relatable and authentic version of myself, which I am certain has made me a better consultant. Over the past 15 years at Egon Zehnder, I have been fortunate enough to see how the act of coming out has benefited not only me, but also our clients, and executives I have coached through major job transitions. When I was asked to share my reflections for National Coming Out Day, aside from describing how coming out has benefited me directly, I knew I would also share a few choice anecdotes about how coming out has impacted clients, candidates, and the Firm.

A Candidate’s Story

The CEO of a global CPG company was all but certain Ashley was the ideal candidate for a new role in the organization leading digital innovation. Ashley had already met with the most senior members of the CEO’s team, including several key business unit presidents and corporate function leads, and had been through our assessment as well as confidential referencing. I had also been following Ashley’s career, having met for the first time at a dinner Egon Zehnder hosted for digital executives three years prior. The feedback was unanimous: Ashley would be a strong addition to the team. However, the CEO was not entirely clear on one question: Why was Ashley really leaving her current employer?

Ostensibly, Ashley’s motivation to make a move was to avoid a job transfer to Europe. However, Ashley was a top performer at her current employer, on track for a step-change promotion to a role that was larger in both scale and scope than the role with the CPG company. Why trade career progression for a lateral move now? The CEO asked me to take additional confidential references, but I already knew the real reason: a relationship. Ashley was a foreign national on an L1 Visa; same sex marriage was not yet recognized in this state; and she was in love with a woman who could not relocate out of the United States.

Fearing Ashley’s discretion would risk her chances at an offer, I advised her to have dinner with the CEO and reveal her personal motives. Her transparency broke the logjam. Almost 10 years later, Ashely still works with our client, has thrived in the culture, been promoted several times, and, incidentally, has built a beautiful family. She married her partner, and they now have two children.

A Client’s Story

“We get the impossible searches” is an oft-used expression in my line of work. Clients trust us to solve their toughest talent problems. One case in point: a global $10B+ consumer products company headquartered in Asia was seeking a Chief Science Officer to build a department in the United States from scratch. This mandate was challenging for several reasons.

The specific set of skills and experiences required for this job narrowed the pool of qualified candidates to only a handful of executives. The top item on the finalist candidate’s list of non-negotiables was not cash, not equity, not a long-term incentive plan, but rather a request for inclusive benefits—specifically support for parental leave, IVF, and surrogacy journeys. The client’s headquarter country does not recognize same-sex marriage, and the client’s current corporate policies, including all health insurance benefits, exclude LGBTQ+ persons.

Beyond the material benefits, the candidate was signaling to our client the expectation that their family would be accepted and cared for as part of the corporate culture, despite the lack of legal protections in the company’s HQ country. I have rarely seen a corporation move as quickly as our client has to create the conditions that would enable this candidate to be equitably covered. What’s more, this experience is only the first in a broader conversation about expanding coverage to other LGBTQ+ employees. I am convinced this will give our client a strong competitive advantage in the market for talent.

A Colleague’s Story

This isn’t my story. I’m borrowing shamelessly from a colleague...let’s call him Justin. This story taught me, and many at our Firm, that connecting authentically with our clients tends to deepen our relationships.

Some years ago, on a Friday afternoon, Justin sat down with a trucking company’s CEO. On the walls hung framed portraits of the all the company’s previous CEOs as well as Chairs. Justin might have felt intimidated, if not for the fact he had already helped this CEO build his executive team and had been invited back to discuss further expanding the relationship with Egon Zehnder.

As the meeting wrapped up, Justin felt a pang of dread—would he be asked: What are you and the wife up to this weekend? Until then, Justin had kept this client relationship strictly professional, never veering into the sphere of private life. Could he risk being open, and would his honesty sour the relationship? Could it result in lost revenues for the Firm?

As all these possibilities flooded his mind, Justin resolved to take the risk to be open. After a long pause, the CEO thanked him for his candor and courage. To Justin’s surprise, having expected the exchange to be a cursory end to the meeting, the CEO asked Justin to share more of his experience as a gay man in the workforce—and they chatted together into the evening. Earlier that year, the CEO’s teenager had come out to the family.

My Reflection

I celebrate the outcomes of these stories, in part because they showcase the personal growth and courage of out queer individuals, in part because they highlight the progress our firm and clients are making, but also because I recognize the ripples spreading from each story. As a global executive search and leadership advisory firm, we have a unique opportunity to shape the senior ranks of the corporate world, and in doing so to impact companies and communities far beyond the scope of any one search or assignment.

As a Firm, we came out of the closet pretty late—only in the past few years have we started to celebrate Pride Month publicly. I am proud of the progress since then, and optimistic about the future. Through investments in our queer-focused ERG ez+, a robust DE&I practice, and our growing partnership with Out Leadership, the Firm is taking steps to empower the out members of our company, and to correct the underrepresentation of out senior leaders in C-Suites and boardrooms. Even more, I hope we are also creating an environment that signals to others it will be safe to come out of the closet and to share their authentic selves in the workplace. The more we come out, the more change we can affect. That is the power of being out.

Topics Related to this Article

Inclusion

LGBTQ+

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top