We asked Raza Haider, the newly appointed CPO for Bose, about his journey to product leadership and his view on the role in today’s innovation landscape. - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Technology OfficersFrom ‘Mini CEOs’ to Teammates

Bose Chief Product Officer Raza Haider shares how the mindsets of product officers have evolved

July 2022

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

What is happening in the Product Leader space.? We asked Raza Haider, the newly appointed CPO for Bose, about his journey to product leadership and his view on the role in today’s innovation landscape.

What was your pathway to product?

It was actually an introduction to Design Thinking that led me to Product.  I was very fortunate to have exposure to many different areas during my time at McKinsey, and it was during one of our conferences in 2008 that I heard someone from IDEO give a talk about Design Thinking. I became fascinated with the concept that non-technical people could come up with amazing product ideas through a customer backed, observation oriented, rapid prototyping approach.  My colleagues and I decided to learn more, take it to clients, and start iterating on it.  That was my introduction, and pretty soon I wanted to stop just talking about it with clients and start doing it.

What do you think most CEOs misunderstand about product?

I don’t want to generalize, but I really like when a CEO takes the time to immerse themselves in a product and the customer experience and when they make time for informal brainstorming and let the creative process play out. I appreciate when they are comfortable looking at early versions and not final product and when they directly listen to field observations and customer feedback. It’s helpful when they talk about the product to the press, the board, and partners, and most importantly, when they let teams feel safe enough to change direction based on what they’re learning - early and often.

How have you seen the priorities, competencies, or skills for product leaders change over time?

Perhaps the biggest, and most welcome, change I have seen is the evolution from the “dictator” to “teammate." I’ve seen product leaders evolve from being the decision makers to seeing themselves as responsible for the speed and quality of the decision. I’ve seen them shift from being the idea generators to the drivers of a Design Thinking mindset and process that produces great ideas. They’ve expanded from being technical experts to having deep curiosity about the underlying tech, coupled with a humility about details that are best left to engineering.  That leads to a great partnership to solve customer problems. I’ve seen the role emerge from being removed from sales and marketing to being a strong partner with the GTM teams with the empathy to realize how hard that job is.

All this has made the once catchy phrase of “Product leaders are mini-CEOs” less of a truism. Now, a product leader can be seen as a great teammate who feels responsible for the final outcome and strives to bring the best of the company together to deliver products to the market that customers love and buy.

What’s in store for the future of the function?

I think this function role has always been pretty constant - Purpose, People, Profit. Though I am starting to see “Planet” find its way onto that priority list.

What’s your advice for others seeking a CPO role as their next step?

Don’t force it and don’t focus on the title.  Do stuff you enjoy with people you trust - learn from and it will happen.

Find ways to work on projects/products where you have the most degrees of freedom to deliver the solution to customers. These may not always be the largest or most revenue generating things but the more levers you have at your disposal the better you will become at solving the complete customer problem.

Push yourself into more and more uncomfortable situations but do it with people you trust and enjoy working with.

Have faith in your ability but question the means and tools that you and your teams are using.

Build great teams, support your team members, and watch the resulting amplification of the impact you are having. That will open doors and opportunities for you.

Topics Related to this Article

Product

Technology

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top