Made for Each Other? What Makes You So Sure? - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Transformational Development ProgramsMade for Each Other? What Makes You So Sure?

Assessing management teams is a crucial element of any due diligence as part of an M&A process.

April 2021

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

What makes an investment flourish or fail? In answering this vital question, investors must weigh up many complex factors. One key element is the quality and fit of the management team − which plays a defining role in the success of any merger or acquisition.

Nevertheless, management team assessments are often carried out in an unstructured, informal manner. In the current environment, with longer investment cycles, this can no longer suffice; it is essential for any investor to invest in HR due diligence before taking the plunge. Conscientious investors must find ways of gauging how a management team functions − as individuals, and as a whole. This can be challenging, particularly if interaction with the team is limited.

There are several important dynamics to observe here: How well does each member of the management team meet his or her job requirements? Do individuals’ skills and personalities complement each other − do they work well together? And lastly, how does the team view the future evolution of their organization?

Matching the right person to the right job

An introverted sales director? A CFO with no head for numbers? Hold on a minute! Unfortunately, leader personalities often do not match or meet the key requirements of their jobs; this turns up in due-diligence processes more often than an unsuspecting investor might assume.

To assess the fit of a senior executive to their current or possible future roles, it’s helpful for investors to take a three-step approach:

Before meeting a leader, analyze his or her work experience, education and any available references.

During management meetings, gain an understanding of how that individual views his or her role.

Finally, judge the extent to which mismatched personalities and skillsets might negatively affect an investment, and consider how to remedy this problem − in extreme cases, replacing an unsuitable individual should be an option.

This last point is tricky: It’s rarely the case that an investor can simply “sack” a business executive. Investors can often do more good, and ultimately get more value, by avoiding the upheaval associated with the exit of a long-term team member.

In our experience, a good compromise is often to move such executives into less operational roles – such as onto an advisory board, where they can act as the interface between investor and company.

Forming a united front

In any management team, individual members need to mesh to form a cohesive whole. Personalities should be complementary: An introverted, analytical person might channel the energy of an extrovert. Skillsets, too, should fit together: One person may cover analytics and financials, for example, while another focuses on sales. And ideally, the team should share a common history, enabling them to get along and shrug off any upsets.

Attending management team meetings allows potential investors to understand how the team interacts. In order to assess individual members, investors should request that each one make a presentation, or lead part of a discussion. Even management meetings held via video (now common due to COVID) can be helpful here: A video conversation can reveal much about management culture, as well as potential conflicts.

Remember to show your “nice” side: Investment is a two-way process, and executives might bristle if an investor appears arrogant or overly critical. Carefully consider your personnel decisions, so as not to derail the process or create bad blood before the real, post-investment work begins.

Looking to the future

A management team that is keen to add new investors needs to demonstrate strategic foresight: Going forward, how do they plan to build and strengthen the organization? How much freedom will they have to foster a modern work culture, enabling the organization to react swiftly and in an agile way to developments? Do they understand where and how new hires, such as an additional middle-management layer, might aid the operation? Strategies should be in place for dealing with the organization’s historical debt as it ages and matures, or for further developing colleagues when they outgrow their current role.

When pondering a deal, an observant investor should be alert to all these strengths and weaknesses. But they should not stop there. As in other investment-critical areas such as go-to-market strategy or pricing, the due-diligence process is the ideal starting point for drawing the roadmap for a company’s future.

Ideally, investors should continue to engage in a structured dialogue with their management team post-deal, to bring the company’s organization to the next level. In our experience, such a process may be lengthy – up to a year; but if conducted well, it can bridge the gap between pure analysis (in the due-diligence phase) and getting things done on the ground.

Assessment is only the first link in the chain of building a talent and development culture. All too often, it is a neglected aspect of the process – but it is one that a modern, diligent investor cannot afford to skip.

Topics Related to this Article

Talent Management

Culture

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top