Chief Executive Officer Search - California State Teachers' Retirement System - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Career Opportunity: Chief Executive Officer, California State Teachers' Retirement System

Position Information

The California State Teachers’ Retirement System (CalSTRS) is seeking to appoint a new Chief Executive Officer (CEO) to succeed Jack Ehnes, who has announced his upcoming retirement. The CEO is the executive and administrative head of the System and operates the System within the framework established by the State Constitution, State laws, and in accordance with rules and policies adopted by the Board. The CEO oversees annual contribution inflows of over $14.5 billion and annual expense outflows for benefit payments of approximately $16 billion. The CEO manages an annual operating budget of approximately $307 million and provides leadership and direction to approximately 1,240 CalSTRS staff.

About the California State Teachers’ Retirement System

The California State Teachers’ Retirement System was established by law in 1913 to provide retirement benefits to California’s public school educators from pre-kindergarten through community college. Today, CalSTRS is the largest educator-only pension fund in the world and the second largest pension fund in the United States, with funds under management of approximately $275 billion.

Role Responsibilities

This CEO needs to be an outstanding leader of people, able to bring to life a vision that will ignite the organization and energize the operating platforms, someone who can expand the boundaries of the business model, maximize financial performance, and manage through market cycles. The CEO is expected to bring fresh, innovative perspectives to CalSTRS. They will have overall responsibility for team development and collaboration, building trust between teams as necessary.

We are looking for a seasoned and respected professional to do the following:

Building and executing strategy: Provide vision, direction, inspiration, and motivation to CalSTRS staff. Oversee and implement the organization’s multi-year strategic and business plan. Ensure that the organization is adhering to its mission, vision, values, and culture of ethics.

Delivering operational excellence: Provide oversight of all program areas and ensure the efficient and effective functioning of the System.

Forging a strong relationship with the Board: Maintain open and constructive relations with the board and work to build consensus whenever possible. Provide guidance to the board regarding legislative proposals and board policies to ensure that the board’s fiduciary responsibilities are adequately addressed.

Providing organizational leadership: Provide a global reach and influence organizations and policy makers. Exhibit leadership among public retirement systems in California and nationwide. Inspire confidence and establish credibility with board, staff, legislators, constituency groups, and stakeholders.

The position is based at CalSTRS’ headquarters in West Sacramento, California.

About Sacramento

Sacramento is the capital of California, located at the confluence of the Sacramento and American Rivers. The city is home to roughly 514,000 people, and Sacramento County to over 1.5 million. Hailed as one of the most ethnically diverse and livable cities in America, it got its start as a supply center for prospectors from around the globe during the 1849 Gold Rush. Since 1854, the city has served as the political nucleus of the nation's most influential state, with the sixth-largest economy in the world.

Boasting more than 250 days of sunshine each year, the city invites residents and visitors to enjoy a variety of outdoor activities, from whitewater rafting to hiking and bicycling, as well as many parks and festivals. It also features venues such as Golden 1 Center (home of the NBA Sacramento Kings), Sacramento Zoo, Historic Old Sacramento and the Waterfront, the State Capitol building and many museums and attractions. Also known as the Farm-to-Fork Capital, it offers a variety of restaurants, breweries and wineries. One can travel to Napa Valley, Lake Tahoe or San Francisco in two hours or less. To learn more, visit the following websites:

Visit Sacramento

Sacramento Metro Chamber of Commerce

West Sacramento Chamber of Commerce

Go Downtown Sacramento

City of Sacramento

City of West Sacramento

Qualifications

The candidate must be able to demonstrate the following:

Experience leading organizations of similar scale and complexity

Experience executing multi-year, large-scale plans and projects

Exposure to and involvement in relationships with boards and external stakeholders

Exposure to and involvement in relationships with government agencies

Having worked at reputable, value-driven organizations

Ideally, experience driving environmental, social and governance agendas across an organization

The candidate should also possess the following critical competencies:

Shaping strategy

Driving change

Delivering results

Influencing collaboratively

Leading teams

Developing talent

A bachelor’s degree or equivalent is required.

Our Mission

Securing the financial future and sustaining the trust of California’s educators.

As a world-class financial services institution and state agency, CalSTRS’ organizational culture emphasizes customer service, leadership and respect for our members and colleagues. We value our employees and encourage an environment motivated by our core values: Customer Service, Accountability, Leadership, Strength, Trust, Respect and Stewardship.

CalSTRS is a great place to work because we have a meaningful mission and we support the health and well-being of our employees. Our leadership team champions our collaborative and service-oriented culture as we work to secure the financial future of California’s educators.

How to Apply

To apply for this position, please send resume and statement of qualifications to:

calstrs.ceosearch@egonzehnder.com

The final filing date for this position is March 1st, 2021.

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top