Corporate Governance Exchange: Former President of PepsiCo Inc, Zein Abdalla, on the Nominations Committee and Leadership Transition - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Transformational Development ProgramsCorporate Governance Exchange: Former President of PepsiCo Inc, Zein Abdalla, on the Nominations Committee and Leadership Transition

November 2021

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

In August 2021, Egon Zehnder convened once again for its ongoing Corporate Governance Exchange (CGX) in India. CGX is an event series that brings together respected non-executive directors some of whom are also Chairpersons of their companies or Nomination and Remuneration committee Chairs on other boards. This session welcomed 14 board members virtually, in addition to Egon Zehnder Chair Jill Ader, as well as Partners Sonny Iqbal and Namrita Jhangiani.

Our guest speaker, on the topic of Nominations and Leadership Transition, was Zein Abdalla, former President of PepsiCo Inc, and current Chair of the Mastercard Foundation, where he also chairs the Nomination and Governance Committee. What follows are some key takeaways from an engaging discussion on the future of cultivating and transitioning leaders, from CEOs to board members.

Ongoing Feedback Versus Annual Assessments of Leadership

How objectively do we really understand how a CEO is performing? We explored this question in detail and generally agreed that the usual box-ticking style of annual leadership evaluations is increasingly insufficient. Such assessments tend to have minimal impact on reforming undesirable practices and can be anticipated by CEOs merely as an opportunity to go on the defensive.

A possible solution for this would be to leverage the unique, and often personal relationships that CEOs have and develop with board members to establish an environment of ongoing feedback. This can allow CEOs to internalize constructive criticism from their peers over time, and without feeling backed into a corner once or twice a year in the form of a sprawling, formal critique.

Promoting Self-Awareness in Leaders

Among the shifting expectations for executive leadership is an enhanced demonstration of self-awareness, and a consensus on this point drove much of the discussion on how future CEOs should be chosen and evaluated throughout their time with an organization. More specifically, the speakers established how a lack of self-awareness in CEOs can result in ego-driven decision making, and an overall attitude of irreplaceability that can cloud their capacity to recognize the appropriate timing for a transition/succession.

This need for self-awareness, according to Abdalla, also extends to the board members, whose interactions with and understanding of company culture are critical to how effectively leadership is evaluated and transitioned.

Having Difficult and Timely Conversations

To further expand on the first point, creating an environment of ongoing feedback doesn’t eliminate the need for leaders to be confronted with difficult topics related to their job performance. For this solution to be effective, board and NRC members need to be willing to have tough conversations with their CEOs on a regular basis. And again, these conversations need to happen in a way that doesn't make the recipients feel unsafe or insecure in their positions.

In addressing this challenge, one common approach among our attendees was to ensure that tough conversations were taking place in a one-on-one format, and in the context of a relationship founded on trust and mutual respect. Such a relationship is often observed between the chairperson and the CEO and it can be tremendously beneficial for this purpose. Moreover, when the relationship is characterized by an ongoing dialogue that also includes positive and neutral feedback, the more difficult topics tend to feel less formal and ultimately less confrontational.

Beyond performance assessments, we also touched briefly on the need to leverage these relationships to make CEOs more comfortable with the idea of their succession. This is critical because if done effectively, it can save an organization a great deal of trouble in transitioning leadership by allowing them to plan for a succession years in advance, and ideally during a period of peak performance rather than operational hardship.

Succession Should be Based on Objective Evaluations, Whether External or Internal

While there was some debate over whether external evaluations might be preferable over internal when it comes to objectivity, the consensus reached was that evaluators should simply be effective, and their assessments based on competency, relevance, and how the candidate suits the overall requirements of the company. Further, and circling back to an emphasis on company culture that permeated most of our discussion, board members need to establish more foundational, objective principles for performance that go beyond their personal relationships. What is the company's culture truly all about? And rather than conceiving of a list of desirable outcomes, can the board decide on a single, non-negotiable principle that reflects the company mission in addition to narrowing the criteria for assessment?

Board Refreshment Best Practices

Finally, our discussion took an unplanned and highly engaging detour into the realm of board refreshment, more specifically how often, and on what basis, should board members be replaced. Some concerns have recently been raised about long-serving board members, and the possibility of seats remaining occupied not necessarily on the basis of added value, but as a result of the politics of unchallenged board member networks or “old boys clubs.”

Because company needs are shifting so rapidly to reflect novel cultural expectations and markets, it's critical that board members are being evaluated on the principles that can benefit these new objectives. It’s what we do in the process of seeking CEOs: clearly articulating the critical experiences and skill profiles we need and filling the position based on that specific criteria. This isn’t always the case when it comes to board members, who often remain seated as a result of long-tenure agreements, regardless of whether their expertise is still applicable in the context of the most current and relevant objectives.

But at the same time, establishing shorter term-limits for board members can have its pitfalls, and increasing the frequency with which board members are formally evaluated could potentially create barriers to a company's progress. Ultimately, we do need some sense of continuity on the board, but we also need refreshment, and it’s about figuring out how to strike that delicate balance. It’s a complex problem that unfortunately lacks a single solution, but is a topic that Egon Zehnder hopes to explore in more depth at future events.

Topics Related to this Article

Board

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top