Embracing Sustainability – From Challenge to Change - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Study on sustainability in family businesses 2021

Embracing Sustainability – From Challenge to Change

Sustainability as a business factor

Sustainability is gaining importance in all areas of life. That is why today’s companies are also increasingly recognizing the need for sustainable business practices. For a long time, large corporations in particular viewed themselves as being sustainable if they got involved in classic “CSR projects” alongside their own core businesses – whether through the construction of solar parks in developing countries or the reforestation of disappearing forests. There is no doubt that such projects themselves provide great added value for the (local) community. However, they can also indicate that the company has not yet developed a willingness to examine its own work in the context of sustainability.

In the meantime, in many companies and industries there has been a rethink, also as a result of public and political pressure. Today’s consumers demand transparency – employees demand a clear stance. Greenwashing is being exposed as such. Doing business responsibly therefore means knowing exactly what the negative impacts of one’s own entrepreneurial actions are, minimizing and compensating for them, taking responsibility for one’s own supply chain and establishing fair operating and business practices, also with subcontractors. In short, sustainability has become a relevant business factor – and not just for large corporations.

Family businesses are a decisive fact in the overall economy. In the German-speaking world, people often like to talk about the formative power of small and medium-sized enterprises as providing the “backbone of the economy”. Around 90 percent of all businesses are family-owned, and these businesses together account for around half of all jobs. Sustainable, entrepreneurial action by family businesses thus has a certain formative character for entire industries. But how sustainable really are family businesses in Germany, Austria and Switzerland?

The study

In a study, Egon Zehnder investigated the issue of what role sustainability plays for family businesses. Sixty-four family businesses in Germany, Austria and Switzerland took part, which can be considered representative. Nine out of the ten companies surveyed employ at least 1,000 people. A good fifth each belong to the consumer goods industry and the mechanical and plant engineering sector. The IT sector and the automotive industry and related sectors are each represented by just under 11 percent. Companies from the chemical and process industries, as well as mining and metallurgy, also took part. The survey respondents were largely family shareholders, as well as occasional board members, managing directors and board members.

The results in brief

Sustainability has a high priority for all companies. More than 80 percent of respondents state that the topic is also very close to their hearts. Although the focus varies from company to company, more than 60 percent of family businesses have anchored sustainability in their own corporate values, and around 50 percent define an explicit sustainability strategy.

It’s clear that family shareholders are increasingly personally involved in shaping sustainability strategies and, through dedicated budgets, create space for the economic consideration of their sustainability goals. Their approach to the topic is clearly value-driven. Sustainability is primarily understood in terms of one’s own generational responsibility. Today, business should be conducted in such a way that existing scope for entrepreneurial action can be maintained for future generations. Accordingly, the motives for sustainable management revolve primarily around questions of social continuity and future competitiveness. Sustainability is seen as a chance to open new fields of business. It is perceived as an opportunity to further develop the company and individual products and to become more attractive to potential specialists and managers.

Many family businesses have therefore fundamentally recognized the need for sustainable management. However, very few measure themselves against this. Less than half of the family businesses surveyed anchor sustainability in their managers’ agreed targets. Furthermore, according to the study, only 40 percent of family businesses link their strategy to concrete projects. Only one third have completed a sustainability certification. And four out of ten companies even refrain from reporting publicly about progress.

Hidden sustainability – an assessment of the results

The figures illustrate that most family businesses do not yet seem to be fully aware that sustainability is already an essential business factor. Yet many family businesses are already further ahead in their thinking than the figures show. They show a genuine interest in many aspects of sustainability, from energy efficiency and biodiversity to fair working conditions and transparency in communication. Quite a few of their sustainability activities already go beyond the regulatory requirements.

The reason behind the reluctance to use measurable values is the fear of public pressure to justify itself and the fear of turning non-governmental organizations against them. Public discourse on sustainability issues can sometimes be very aggressive and undifferentiated. In this environment, many family businesses, whose structure is designed for harmony and fairness, assume that they will not be able to find any productive opportunities for participation. Sustainability plays a role in all business processes, especially in research and development, in the supply chain and in public relations. The time for CSR projects that were only marginally related to company’s own activities is over. To a lesser extent, sustainability aspects have so far been incorporated into back-office processes, e.g., IT and financial planning.

However, there are also challenges outside of the company in this area. There are very different standards and certification procedures, and in the context of family businesses, no industry standards or certificate has yet been established. Overall, family businesses are on the right track and have the right intentions, despite all the transformative challenges. If family businesses succeed in breaking free from their value-driven mindset, then sustainability can be an opportunity and drive future development.

Egon Zehnder's six recommendations

Against the background of discussions related to this study,

Egon Zehnder has drawn up six key recommendations for family businesses:

Strong anchoring of sustainability in value system & culture

A clearly defined sustainabilitygoal is often missing

Target agreement systemsso far hardly linked to sustainability

No uniform reporting or certification has yet been established

What are the main sustainability challenges for organizations?

Study as PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top