EU Biotech CEOs and Board Members Reflect on a Turbulent 2020 - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

BiotechnologyEU Biotech CEOs and Board Members Reflect on a Turbulent 2020

February 2021

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Egon Zehnder rounded off 2020 with a final gathering of biotech CEOs and board members, who shared their reflections on a turbulent year. We started these forums in April 2020 to connect biotech leaders as the world and the industry faced an unprecedented crisis. As we closed the year, there was a degree of fatigue, but hope and optimism for the year ahead, and a desire to build on the unique opportunities that COVID-19 has also created.

Many leaders felt fatigued, highlighting a desire to re-energize and build further resilience

Most participants observed that their teams were fatigued by 2020, and energy levels had dropped. Having to round off the year on Zoom was not anticipated earlier in 2020. Many employees are struggling with the lack of routine. “The mood is less optimistic, and it is becoming hard to keep up the energy levels–everyone has had enough”.

They frequently cited the lack of downtime and expansion of the working day with virtual meetings. “[It] feels like you are running a primary care clinic, back to back. If you are running behind five minutes for the first [meeting], you will be an hour late for the last one”.

In the early days, as companies tried to establish a common sense of purpose, it was important to demonstrate that we were all in the same boat. One CEO started writing a personal blog to staff, rather than a corporate communications output; they observed that staff related well to their CEO showing a more human side. In meetings, there was more discussion on a personal level, as colleagues entered each other’s personal space.

One US-based CEO of a UK company had managed to return to the UK during the summer respite period. They described the incredible feeling to be with people again; others noted how much this was missed in terms of fostering team spirit and creativity.

There was a sense of apprehension from many leaders as to how they and their teams would manage under the continuation of lockdowns, restrictions and business interruptions, and a recognition that proactive support is needed to support people to maintain their energy.

Leaders did see some positives in the crisis, with the exponentially accelerated digital agenda, increased flexibility and openness from leaders, and more effective board relations

Digital strategies and the internal and external day-to-day use of technology in some cases jumped ahead by as much as five years versus original plans.

One CEO noted: “The power of technology has surprised me. I had 300 people from 212 countries all together on Zoom”…“we have a very young team; we’ve done better as they are more used to having virtual discussions; older [team members] required a lot of energy to adapt. Maybe this new mode of meeting is more suited to the younger generation.”

Others highlighted the dramatic change in availability of digital interaction (video, email, photography) with physicians, particularly in primary care, where uptake was historically slow; this was seen as likely to be a permanent change.

The use of technology and virtual approaches in a clinical trial setting was seen as another positive, with the ability to accelerate development programs, as well as some flexibility shown by regulators.

Hosting healthcare conferences virtually was one area where remote interaction was considered less successful. JP Morgan hosted its 2021 conference online, and while there were still deals to be done, the experience of being able to bring together a group of people from different companies and different disciplines is one missed by many.

COVID-19 has highlighted opportunities for improving day-to-day operations: “You think you have good systems and processes but COVID-19 has put the spotlight on them and tested them to the limit…we have cracks, and things fall through those cracks.”

Boards have increased their interaction with management teams, which has proven to be very helpful. One participant noted: “Board meetings have often convened when necessary, rather than when planned. That has been a very positive benefit”. CEOs typically now feel more comfortable reaching out to their board members for advice, and there was a sense board performance has improved.

Looking towards the future, leaders struggled with the level of uncertainty, but were optimistic about 2021

As leaders prepare for a post-pandemic world, there is a lot of uncertainty to be factored in and it is difficult to appreciate the exact impact in each market.

As a group, leaders need to demonstrate optimism, but it should be grounded in realism.

Leaders were optimistic of meaningful improvement in the next 6-9 months, but recognized that, until a solution is found, it is still a significant global problem, even with current vaccination rollouts.

The challenges with vaccine supply chains were cited, and have been borne out following the approval of multiple vaccines.

Many previous working norms have completely changed and leaders questioned how to embed some of the positive new routines.

Is there a need for so much travel? It is now often seen as a waste of time and should only be used for situations where it is truly beneficial.

Flexibility will endure, to varying degrees. “We have moved on from the notion that we need to work 9 to 5. There is now more of a mindset that outputs are what’s important.”

At the same time, not everything works as well remotely; we will need a hybrid approach.

In meetings there have been some real advantages to remote working, but also obvious drawbacks: “Time in the meetings is quite wasteful, with a tendency to involve more people than is necessary.” “It is hard to achieve the same as you do in in-person meetings. Are people really listening on Zoom calls?”

One company had been in the process of relocating before the pandemic. With lockdown restrictions in place, operations had been completely virtual for four months, which worked surprisingly well.

As working from home has been more effective than expected, this may reduce the need for commercial space. One executive observed that their company pushed back increasing the size of premises for another year and had adjusted future plans.

There was a consensus that progress on vaccines will deliver a big improvement through 2021, despite the challenges, and that it will be important to build on some of the positive changes seen in 2020.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

CEO

Disruption

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top