In Conversation with Elizabeth Ames, CEO of Women In Product - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Technology OfficersIn Conversation with Elizabeth Ames, CEO of Women In Product

At a time when so many businesses are scrambling for top talent, it makes sense to expand hiring horizons. The best fit for your Product role may be waiting in an unexpected place.

September 2021

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Product roles are a relative newcomer to the business “mainstream.” Originally forged in Silicon Valley, Product Leaders came into being as a bridge between higher profile engineering teams and market demand. Today, their role stands on its own as the crucible of what’s possible and what’s viable. Business has recognized the Product function as vital to innovation and success in the marketplace. Product leadership roles are cropping up in every industry and Product talent is in hot demand. The position has emerged as a key voice in the C-suite.

Yet even as the star of Product leadership rises and companies compete for top talent, issues of diversity and inclusion linger. In today’s marketplace, women are deeply under-represented in Product leadership. We had the opportunity to sit down with Elizabeth Ames, CEO of Women In Product, a nonprofit organization dedicated to empowering women in product management and advocating for equal representation. Ames outlined the issues facing women in product leadership and the ways businesses can work to change the landscape and acquire top talent.

What was your career path and how did you come to lead Women in Product?

I have worked in Tech all of my career, beginning at Apple and then working at a variety of startup companies. I’ve held positions in product, marketing, strategy and general management roles. Tech is an exciting place to work, there are so many smart and capable people.

Over the time I began to notice that there were fewer and fewer women and particularly at the highest levels. In 2012, I got the opportunity to join Anitab.org, the organization that puts on The Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing series. Although I had no non-profit experience, I was passionate about getting more women into tech. In 2019 I took on my current role as CEO of Women In Product. It has been a wonderful experience.

What inspired the formation of Women in Product?

In 2016, several women product leaders in the San Francisco Bay Area got together over dinner. Dinners led to other networking events and eventually to the first Women In Product conference. Three hundred women attended that first conference but 3,000 signed up! It was immediately clear that there was a larger need for community, connection and insight for women working in the field.

There are many very talented women product leaders out there who likely aren’t on your radar but you should make an effort to find them.

Why are women under-represented in product roles?

Women are currently underrepresented in product roles due to the move around the mid 2000’s to requiring a Computer Science or related degree (like Electrical Engineering) for Product Management roles. This change immediately restricted the number of women that would qualify to a trickle and put women already in the field, often at very senior levels, in jeopardy. For nearly 10 years, that was the standard and it blocked many women from pursuing the field.

In the early 2010’s several companies began to look at the actual correlation between a technical degree and performance as a PM. What many found was that there wasn’t a correlation that more and more people without Computer Science degrees were excellent PMs. Since around 2014 the CS degree requirement has diminished in importance or been eliminated, and we have seen a corresponding increase in the number of women seeking and in product roles. There is an excellent article on this history written by our co-founder and Board President, Deb Liu. You can find the article on LinkedIn here.

What are the key changes (positive or negative) for women in product leadership roles that your organization witnessed since its creation?

The key change that we have seen in the profession is the inclusion of product in the C-suite. More and more companies are hiring Chief Product Officers, and boards now see product experience as valuable and seek out board members with product backgrounds. Because women were generally blocked from the field for many years due to the CS degree requirement, they are playing a bit of catch up to get tapped for these most senior opportunities. That is one of our key challenges: To make these fantastic women product leaders more visible so that they are in the consideration loop for these opportunities.

One of our key challenges is to make these fantastic women product leaders more visible so that they are in the consideration loop for these opportunities.

If you could tell companies seeking to hire product leaders three things – what would they be?

1. Keep your job requirements broad.

There are many women who bring unique backgrounds to product. They may have studied non-traditional subjects or entered the field in non-traditional ways but they bring strong customer empathy and see things differently. Don’t demand a CS degree without testing whether it correlates with success and is needed.

2. Seek out women candidates.

There are many very talented women product leaders out there who likely aren’t on your radar but you should make an effort to find them. Women, especially in the current COVID-19 environment, may be inclined to keep their heads down and just do great work. We know women aren’t likely to apply for a job unless they meet 100% of the requirements, versus men who will apply if they meet 50%. There are highly qualified women who aren’t necessarily raising their hands. Go find them. You won’t regret it.

3. Take a good hard look at the diversity of your staff.

If they all look the same, come from the same schools, or have come through internal references, you need to diversify. Diversity is important when it comes to fostering innovation and addressing complex problems. As outlined in Scott Page’s book “The Diversity Bonus,” people who think differently than you add a lot of value. Take advantage of that bonus.

At a time when so many businesses are scrambling for top talent, it makes sense to expand hiring horizons. The best fit for your Product role may be waiting in an unexpected place. Broadening expectations may lead to candidates who bring new ideas and new perspectives to the function.

Topics Related to this Article

Digital

Inclusion

Leadership

Product

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top