Taking The Right Exit: Private Equity CFOs Share Their Wisdom - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

CFO & Audit ChairTaking The Right Exit: Private Equity CFOs Share Their Wisdom

October 2020

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Before the pandemic, Egon Zehnder had planned a dinner for private equity CFOs on the topic “How to make a good exit.” Instead, the CFO team, led by Barbara Kroll, hosted a series of virtual interviews with the four prominent executives listed below. Key themes included resilience, the power of ‘storytelling’ and how best to influence investors. They also discussed the differences between a pure IPO journey, a public-to-private transaction, and a private-to-private transaction, sharing their own experiences navigating each of these processes and recommendations for how to make them successful.

Aligning and managing stakeholders

The first key message that emerged from our interviews was that there should be strong chemistry between the PE fund and the CFO. “You want to be able to work with a PE fund that really wants you,” one CFO said. Another CFO emphasized the need to consider how the initial role specification fits with your personality and what you want from a role. Another suggested asking direct questions from the outset such as, “What do you expect from me?” and “How shall we communicate?” to set the tone for a healthy relationship.

It is also crucial to be spending extra time with the senior fund managers. During the pandemic, it has been especially important to use video conferencing in place of physical meetings to ensure watertight relations. In addition, if there’s little connection between the CFO and the CEO, there will be a great deal of struggle throughout the process. This should not be neglected.

Identifying a path to value creation

Prior to taking the exit, value identification and creation is crucial. Our CFOs underscored the importance of making the leap from acting as simply a “financial accountant” to becoming “a true business partner.” Spending a great deal of time with the CEO co-running the business and remaining close to the customer were deemed important by one CFO. Another pointed to the motto “done is better than perfect” –, focussing on the prioritisation of three to four topics rather than trying to do everything at once. This framework was then utilised to drive simplicity for investors.

The role of ‘storytelling’

A strong theme throughout all the discussions was the importance of crafting a compelling narrative during an exit process. What proof points does one need to build case studies? Why are margins sustainable? All of the CFOs agreed that one needs to write the story first, then fit the details and numbers back into it, and that often strategy consultants can help identify the building blocks for this. They also recommended anticipating the kinds of questions that you might receive from groups of investors. In one example of an IPO exit, the CFO explained that the fact that “the story vision was presented first and then the financials were slotted into that” led to the success of the process.

Going towards a sale

One CFO reiterated the importance of “not being blinded by a high bid.” He recommended spending time to understand the mechanics of the buyer’s plan with the company, how integration may or may not be happening and the rationale behind the bid. Also, in strategic sales one might need to answer questions around leveraging synergies and long-term value; whereas if selling to another fund orin a public-to-private scenario, the exercise will feel more financial than strategic.

Being prepared for how the different contexts will stretch one’s knowledge is vital. In one specific example, a CFO reflected that had he known they were planning on removing the management team, he would have liked to have taken more money out of the deal, but felt too blinded by the number. While chemistry between negotiating parties was an element to some processes considered, the CFOs agreed that price tops this consideration.

Staying energised

All of our guests spoke animatedly about needing a great deal of enthusiasm for these kinds of processes, as they are arduous and long. Energised by the chase, the feeling that they’re making a difference and the passion for value creation has enabled all of them to conduct multiple exits throughout their careers.

Personal learnings

Reflecting on the process, one CFO pointed out just how important flexibilityhas been in terms of getting through the exit scenarios he’s led. With this comes the need for a low ego, he said: “It’s not about you; you’re there to facilitate the transaction and create value for shareholders.” Another key characteristic is resilience and staying calm through the inevitable stress, workload and turbulence of the situation. One thing that can arm CFOs and their teams to feel resilient, said one, is “knowing your stuff.” Whether standing in front of private equity partners, investors or the management team, one needs to know enough to exude a level of knowledge about the business, but there is no need to fret over not knowing the minutia. A good number two is always recommended as well.

With thanks to:

Phil Marshall

Phil’s spent 17 years with GE in both CFO and CEO roles, before moving into PE-backed CFO roles. In 2014, he became the Group CFO for Wood Mackenzie which was bought out pre-IPO. He next joined Exova Group where he coordinated a public-to-private transaction. Since 2018, he has been CFO at Avast which IPO’ed as the largest- ever software listing in the UK in May 2018.

Hilton Hess

Following 19 years at Unilever, Hilton joined Rentokil as a Divisional CFO, going through a significant business restructuring. Hilton next became CFO of PE-backed Allflex(now Antelliq) steering the business through significant acquisitions and refinancing transactions which was successfully exited to Merck. Hilton recently joined PE-backed VISTRA as CFO.

Peter Van Tiggelen

Peter led an international career in various pharmaceutical and medical device companies in the Finance function. He has coordinated 2 exits in his career, with the sale of AMCo in 2015 and more recently, with the sale of CRF Health in 2018. Currently he is the CFO at Itiviti, a PE backed fintech company based in London.

Jonathan Gomer

Jonathan’s early career was with The Economist Group and FT Group before his move into Mergermarket/Acuris. He has made 3 successful exits through his career with Mergermarket/Acuris, most recently to ION. Jonathan has recently joined Burwash Investment Group as the Founder.

Topics Related to this Article

Finance

Leadership

COVID-19

Private Equity

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top