CEO Leadership for a New Future - CEO Insights Series - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

From “Know-it-Alls to Learn-it-Alls”: CEO Leadership for a New Future

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

In his new, highly acclaimed book, No Rules Rules, Reed Hastings, the founder and CEO of Netflix, recounts a telling story. It was 2007, still the early days for Netflix, when they were largely in the DVD-by-mail business and figuring out how to launch into streaming. Hastings pushed through a plan (infamously known as the Qwikster debacle). It was an abysmal failure: They lost millions of subscribers, and the stock price dropped more than 75 percent. In the aftermath, many Netflix executives came forward: “I knew it was going to be a disaster,” said one, “but Reed is always right, so I kept quiet.” And one VP confessed to Hastings, “You’re so intense when you believe in something, Reed, that I felt you wouldn’t hear me.” For Hastings, this was “the lowest point in my career—definitely not an experience I want to repeat.” But it was also a stark wake-up call, providing valuable lessons that have helped forge Hastings’ and Netflix’s stunning success ever since.

Few people on the outside really understand how challenging the journey of a CEO is.  And many CEOs themselves (like Hastings) learn the necessity of ongoing adaptation the hard way. Those who seem to adjust best remain cognizant that being CEO is an evolving state; they remain open to keep considering “what got you here won’t get you there,” as they move through their tenures. Quoted often (far harder to actually heed), this proves over and over again to be a truism--now more than ever.

Staying Open to What You Don’t Know

Old ways of being and thinking are constantly overplayed and overused. “They define who we are. In the process, these reflexes make us blind to the changing needs around us,” writes Herminia Ibarra, renowned professor of organizational behavior, now with the London Business School. We see this quite often and have advised numerous CEOs who come into role heavily reliant on the strengths that paved their way there. With support they come to recognize that these skills may actually be holding them back and eventually evolve to great effect to be the leaders they intended to be.

At this time in history, it has never been more important for CEOs to ground themselves in a strong core sense of leadership identity and purpose with a resolute commitment to ongoing growth and learning. This means coming into the role knowing who you are as a leader while staying open to what you don’t know—and remaining willing to explore and evolve throughout one’s tenure as the work, role, and world necessitates. “I look back now and believe I should have checked in more, reinvented myself every two years,” one ex-CEO, who led one of the world’s largest auto manufacturers, recently shared with us at a conference on CEO leadership. Increasingly we hear from CEOs like this one, who have learned that in order to transform their organizations, they must keep transforming themselves. COVID and the current challenges facing us all have only made this more imperative.

Disciplined attention is the currency of leadership.

Ronald Heifetz, Harvard Business School

Actions Speak Louder Than Words

When it comes to learning, we mistakenly gravitate to the belief that we must figure things out in our head, to think our way through to solutions. In fact, all arrows seem to point otherwise—that you actually act your way into a new way of being and doing. The most effective way to move into change is by doing things differently and working against an entrenched mindset. It is active experimentation that actually changes the way one thinks. Ibarra has coined the term “outsight” to stress the importance of seeking external knowledge, new experiences, and active learning. To do this, one needs to become willing to step out of their comfort zone, to become more playful and move beyond familiar leadership styles. Leaders who stay curious and keep feeding that curiosity are going to see things that intrigue them and shift the levers to learn more.

Probably one of the best current examples of a leader who has kept himself and his people focused “outside the box,” growing beyond the company’s entrenched thinking and practices, is CEO Satya Nadella of Microsoft. When asked how to account for his stunning success as a leader, Nadella has said many times: changing from being a company of “Know-It-Alls” to becoming one of “Learn-It-Alls.” Advancing this movement takes trust in the self, committing to an ongoing willingness to keep getting better. “To me, what is most important is being able to come up with new ways of doing things, new ways of framing what is a failure and what is a success, to how one achieves success, “ Nadella has stated. “It’s through a series of failures, a series of hypothesis testing. That’s in some sense the real pursuit.”

In advising sitting CEOs how to keep evolving, we have worked with Professor Robert Kegan of Harvard and applied his “Immunity to Change” model which helps leaders keep strengthening their identities and transforming. It is important that CEOs begin their tenures having already gained a self-authoring mind. But it is equally important that they remain acutely aware of their actions and of how they are thinking. We see too often, as Kegan puts it, “If they impose their will without realizing they have pushed their own values to the limit, there is a risk of them failing unknowingly into the narrow vision of this tough era with its cold and rugged environmental change.” This is why, Kegan stresses, “CEOs with a self-transforming mind must maintain their balance, be aware of their limitations, and continue to learn in a spirit of modesty.”

To do this, CEOs need to become willing to create the space to nurture the energy and hone the awareness for their own adaptive changes to keep emerging. Setting aside time for self-reflection is important. Being open to receiving regular feedback from other leaders in the organization and their teams will also help. And ongoing development work with advisors, coaches, and peers has proven increasingly essential.

In our experience, the most responsible and successful CEOs keep breaking through to greater self-understanding and wisdom. Gradually, they become more and more comfortable in their skin. As one recently shared with us after immersing himself in a further explorative program: “Developing purposeful leading in the world step-by-step is extremely hard to do. It is ongoing. It requires from each leader a boldness and self-confidence that is often not the norm these days—a boldness that is about understanding that leaders have the potential to change the world in small steps.” Those CEOs who come to this point of improvement and awakening in the role, just get better and better. And they grace the world with the leadership it so desperately needs.

< Volume 16
Both/And CEO Leadership

Volume 18 >
CEO Allyship for LGBTQ+ Inclusion

Explore more of our CEO Insights editions.

Get the Insights

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Leadership

Leadership Development

Leading in Complexity

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top