Charting the Future of Mobility and Automation - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

DigitalCharting the Future of Mobility and Automation

Q&A with Sense Photonics CEO Shauna McIntyre on why leaders in these sectors must be nimble and ‘ready for an adventure’

December 2020

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

The future of mobility and automation is not all driverless cars and armies of robots on shop room floors. In fact, it is much more about the blend of irreplaceable human capabilities and ideas and the efficiency of machines. Sense Photonics CEO and Lithia Motors Board Director Shauna McIntyre spoke with Egon Zehnder’s Martha Josephson to share how customer experience is transforming how we live and work in the future.

Tell us a little bit about Sense Photonics and who your customers are.

We are providing a new way for objects to see in the world around them, which is decoupled from ambient light, so they don't need the sunlight to be able to see. Five or six years ago when autonomous vehicles started really emerging on the scene, a lot of companies were born trying to solve this vision problem. Many were doing it mechanically and in complicated ways. I called on my mechanical background and realized automotive wants nothing to do with very complicated expensive systems, and so we're solving it in a very different way with basic semiconductor chip manufacturing process on the detector side and then emitter is done by an array of micro-lasers.

We predominantly serve the automotive sector with a government contract in security systems. We serve mainly the OEMs, but we're also building up Tier 1 partnerships to then deploy this product into the vehicle. The Autonomous Vehicle companies are also eager to test our technology as a refreshing change to the complex mechanical systems they’ve used to-date.

You were previously leading Google's automotive services program—what led you to switch roles?

What compelled me to leave Google was the opportunity to make a difference in the world. That we have a breakthrough opportunity that is not being served, and even though there are a lot of companies trying to do this, there is a big gaping hole right in the middle in terms of high-performance but low-cost and very robust solutions the automotive sector especially needs. Also, it was an opportunity to bring together all the experiences I've had. So from the plant at Ford, engineering with Honeywell, and then switching gears to Egon Zehnder to be able to focus on people and talent. I firmly and still fiercely believe that it's really the people that build business success. To build a team and have other people realize their dreams—that for me was just too great of an opportunity to pass up.

Lithia Motors is an interesting example. When I look at them, I think, “OK, they sell cars. That’s a pretty old-fashioned business.” Tell me why they are now “transportation solutions.”

This is an amazing story. They have all the ingredients to be a stodgy, old-fashioned company and they're everything but. They basically knew that the world was going to be changing ahead of them and they knew that they needed to embrace technology. They recognized the risk of inaction is greater than action. It's really about getting your minds into the eyes and the hearts of customers, and building out that understanding of, “OK, we’re not selling cars. We’re actually giving customers an experience and we need to be able to keep those customers for life by giving them a good experience.”

How does COVID-19 affect your business today and going forward?

Here's the thing that's really interesting—the pandemic has actually propelled the need for a lot of automation, because who wants to go grocery shopping anymore where you're in a mask and you're trying to stay six-feet apart? We did a survey to understand the future of retail, and 70 percent of shoppers would rather shop online, so there's a lot that's going to be moving online even though there was already a lot of growth in e-commerce. But the automotive side is not losing steam at all. What's happening is the increasing need for LiDAR advanced driver assistance (ADAS), and with our price-points, we make it possible. The vehicle will do more for you even though you're the driver behind the wheel, and today's expensive LiDAR solutions don't fit into the automaker's cost envelope for a purchased vehicle. We have an inherent advantage in our Silicon-based approach, which enables an acceptable price point.

Hear from Sense Photonics CEO Shauna McIntyre on how she blends a future vision with today’s mobility needs.

"I think number one is that they [good leaders] listen."

What gets people comfortable with automation both with employees in the warehouse and with customers?

I think the deployment of all these technologies needs to be done in a very controlled and careful fashion, and we’re seeing that to a certain degree. In terms of autonomy, a lot of it's being done in controlled environments. For example, we don't see little robots going all over our streets yet because they're testing them, they're making sure that they're secure. The other thing is cybersecurity. We have to worry about all these connected devices and who's going to hack into them. So the more controlled the environment, the higher the degree of automation possible. But when it comes to the open roads, in and around homes, it's very hard to control the environment. The last to become automated are those vehicles with people in them, I believe. I think there's a lot that could be automated before that in terms of safe, autonomous routes, during certain times of day, safe weather conditions, types of road conditions, etc.

How do you hire people who are prepared to address an autonomous future?

Right now we're in such a dynamic world. Six months ago it was so different, and six months from now it's going to be so different. We need people who are just nimble and can be vulnerable in the world. We can't control all the change going on, and so we just have to be ready for that adventure and take it in stride. I look for people who may have had that big company experience because there's a structured way of thought process by which people really build a capability in a big company, but they also need to have that entrepreneurial experience to really understand that it's just a wild crazy world out there and welcome to our adventure.

What has it been like for you often being the only woman in the room in technology?

That imposter syndrome—you do get it. You have to just kick yourself in the pants and ask yourself why you’re being so self-critical. I found that as I was more self-critical those voices in my head were stopping me from actually voicing what I needed to voice and then it curtailed my own performance. It's up to me to recognize that those voices of self-criticism are the ones that are tearing me down. They are not tearing down the guy next to me because he doesn’t have those voices in his head. So I had to nip that one in the bud.

Between Egon Zehnder, Google, Sense Photonics, and the Lithia board, what have you learned about what good leadership looks like?

I think number one is that they [good leaders] listen. Really listen to your people, listen to the market, listen to your customers, listen to your shareholders, your investors. You really need to understand and balance where your vision is and where you think the world can go—where your company can go—but really staying grounded on what you're hearing and what the reality is in front of you. That drives a leader to be much more closely aligned with their people, and to me it's really about the team. I may be the CEO and the face to investors and to the outside world, but really it's my team that's executing, and we are a unit.

Watch the full video interview below.

Play

Martha Josephson and Shauna McIntyre - Full Interview

Sense Photonics CEO and Lithia Motors Board Director Shauna McIntyre spoke with Egon Zehnder’s Martha Josephson to share how customer experience is transforming how we live and work in the future.

Topics Related to this Article

Digital

CEO

Disruption

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

What Leaders Need to Know Today to Create a Better World Tomorrow

What Leaders Need to Know Today to Create a Better World Tomorrow

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top