A Tale of Two Decades: How Global Crises Have Changed CEO Succession in the Mining Industry - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Mining & MetalsA Tale of Two Decades: How Global Crises Have Changed CEO Succession in the Mining Industry

New research shows nearly 4 out of 5 mining CEOs hired since 2010 were internal appointments, a significant increase over the prior decade

August 2020

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

The new normal ushered in by COVID-19 has spurred Boards to reevaluate their succession plans and processes. This renewed focus is reminiscent of the change in approach toward leadership decisions made by company Boards following the 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC). To get a better sense of how a crisis affects leadership planning, Egon Zehnder’s global Mining & Metals practice recently analyzed 40 mining CEO transitions that took place during the period 2000-2019 – at publicly traded companies in operation for at least 20 years with a market capitalization exceeding US$5B. We split our CEO succession analysis into two decade-long industry phases:

Markedly different sets of data emerged from our analysis, showing a distinct shift in CEO attributes between 2010-2019 and the prior 2000-2009 period. The average age of a CEO when appointed rose from 49 to 54 years old, and although average CEO tenure appears to have shortened from 5.2 years to 4.4 years – the latter average is derived from a relatively smaller number of CEOs who departed largely due to retirements in the last decade. There was also roughly a 13 percentage-point increase in internal appointments to 75 percent of all CEO hires during the period 2010-2019, indicating that Boards moved away from charismatic outsiders with experience and capabilities that did not always suit companies’ needs.

Although the factors driving these trends are complex and ever shifting, we believe that the GFC was a major inflexion point – not only impacting how companies make financial decisions today, but also influencing leadership decisions being made by mining company Boards. CEO appointments are one of the few variables over which Boards have complete control, and this is being taken more seriously – with the GFC serving as a cautionary tale amid the ongoing COVID-19 crisis.

Most mining companies we work with today have succession planning practices in place with active Board involvement and an eye on high-performing talent. This was not necessarily the case pre-GFC, when companies hired and fired “heavy hitters” who were often external hires in pursuit of growth. Succession planning was not necessarily a priority at that time, and the industry employed a cycle mentality to people decisions. Post-GFC, we have seen a distinct shift in the industry toward a more robust and pragmatic approach to CEO succession planning. Mining CEOs appointed during 2010-2019 are relatively older, with nearly four out of five CEOs appointed internally – perceived as a safe pair of hands who will have accumulated a body of knowledge over a long span of time, much of which is specific to the company.

Our analysis of CEO transitions also revealed a shift in the typical CEO backgrounds between the two decades. During the growth super-cycle, CEOs with “mining focused” experience in corporate finance and investment banking comprised nearly 60 percent of all CEO hires – in particular to pursue in-organic growth opportunities characterized by mega deals and consolidation. Relatively fewer CEOs with finance backgrounds took the reins during 2010-2019, as companies prioritized productivity improvements and optimization of operating costs. The industry’s flight to safety post-GFC led to a higher percentage of CEO appointments with solid operational experience, and in most cases, intimate knowledge of company assets.

Strong succession planning limits the possibility of ineffective CEO hires, who will remain in the role longer than they should or necessitate an unplanned replacement. A positive indicator that supports this view is the percentage of CEOs replaced, which has nearly halved during 2010-2019, notably from among a larger number of internally appointed CEOs. Succession planning can also increase diversity in senior management through carefully crafted development opportunities – for example, roles that increase international exposure or P&L responsibility given to high-potential functional leaders.

How can Boards ensure a strong pipeline of potential CEO successors, ideally to promote from within? Egon Zehnder’s study, “Turning Potential into Success – The Missing Link in Leadership Development,” suggests that 72 percent of managers have what it takes to grow into C-suite roles. Strong future leaders can be developed successfully from within, but they have to be identified early on and given exposure to opportunities that will stretch and grow them. Boards can bridge the gap between raw talent and executive success by ensuring that management follows these four steps:

Determine the most important competencies for leadership roles in your organization.

Assess employees’ potential by looking at the five predictors associated with success – motivation, curiosity, insight, engagement and determination.

Map people’s potential to the competencies required in various roles.

Give emerging leaders the opportunities, coaching, and support they need to strengthen critical competencies.

Both the Board and high-potential leaders will need to find a balance between meeting short-term expectations and long-term investment in order for talent to grow from within. However, a lot can be achieved in a decade.

Developing Transformational CEO Successors

As the industry enters a new phase, we must accept that our environment will continue to be extraordinarily volatile, and our choice of leadership becomes more critical. Triggered by the COVID-19 crisis, many mining companies want to enhance the pragmatic approach they had adopted for CEO succession post-GFC. This renewed focus is an opportunity for companies to take a dynamic approach toward succession planning that remains both realistic and systematic in practice.

What we’re seeing is that succession planning as the industry today knows it (9-box grids, 360-degree feedback, etc.) is necessary but not enough. While companies have become more adept at identifying and nurturing highly capable talent, they must also recognize and cultivate future leadership potential. COVID-19 is already changing how the world works, affecting global supply chains, the workforce, and the workplace. Concurrently, there is a spotlight on business resilience, with a focus on ESG, digitalization, and commodities of the future (driven by clean energy and battery storage mega trends). The industry’s approach to CEO succession must evolve from appointing a safe and capable leader to developing a strong pipeline of executives who can embrace disruptive change and drive transformation.

Companies can cultivate transformational leadership by using a five-part model to spotlight strengths that future leaders can build on and gaps they need to address. The five dimensions are:

Mastering complexity – the ability to sift and integrate the multiple factors influencing the company’s success, and see through the “noise” to distill real insight and set clear direction

Orchestrating creativity – the capacity to instill a mindset and a framework for action that enables the organization to generate – and implement – truly innovative ideas

Growing emotional commitment – the ability to create a compelling “call for action” imbued with higher meaning and strong emotional content, so building organizational commitment far beyond “programs and processes”

Anchoring in society – the ability to connect the company’s business purpose to a long-term mandate of creating social value, and to align the organization’s activities and communication with that purpose

Building next-level leadership – the capacity to energize and develop the next generation of leaders, using innovative models for collective action

With disruptions on the horizon, companies must be ready to meet unforeseen challenges, plan for the unknown, and prepare for what’s next. To do so, they will need to cultivate leaders who are proactive, adaptive, and innovative – and who can mobilize organizations not just to change but also to transform.

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Board

Leadership

Industrial

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top