Avoiding CEO Succession Planning Pitfalls - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Family Business AdvisoryAvoiding CEO Succession Planning Pitfalls

How family businesses can balance family values with strong leadership planning

September 2020

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Family businesses often gravitate toward keeping their top leadership roles within the family. A survey of 53 global firms reveals that most family businesses follow a clear hierarchy when considering candidates, giving preference to family first (38 CEOs were family members), followed by internal talent and external executives. However, just because your talent will likely come from within your company does not mean your succession planning processes do not matter. Family company Boards must create and maintain strong succession plans that consider both internal and external talent, as well as development plans for potential successors—and do all this while balancing the values and priorities of the family with the demands of growing and sustaining a business.

Succession Planning Pitfalls and Solutions

There are several common traps family-owned businesses fall into when succession planning:

Pitfall #1: The pool of candidates.

In another study we conducted of 50 family-owned companies across 18 countries, nearly 30 percent of 50 family-owned companies considered only one candidate for CEO, and about two-thirds did not follow a structured selection process. In some cases, the CEO decision was based on knowing the person or recommendation of a trusted person.

Solution: Professionalize your succession planning process, taking into account development time for internal candidates and including external candidates in the mix to ensure you truly considered all of your options. (Note that internal development is more difficult in some countries—particularly in China, where the one-child policy significantly limits the number of family members.)

Pitfall #2: The founder isn’t ready to cede control.

For first-generation founder-led companies, the founder’s ability to “let go” is often the biggest challenge for CEO succession. Many founders hope that the new CEO will simply do things his or her way with more success and growth. This is especially true in China, where first-generation founders lead most of the family businesses and they alone decide on both business and family priorities.

Solution: Founders must strive for strong self-awareness and a clear long-term vision of the company, which will allow them to see the key competencies and characteristics to look for in new leadership. Additionally, the level of control and empowerment of the new CEO should be defined through frequent communication, especially during the on-boarding process. Moreover, founders must have some type of role, otherwise they may find an excuse to take control again.

Pitfall #3: The lines between management, the family, and the Board are too blurry.

Often when there is crossover between management, the family, and the Board, it is difficult to separate the tasks of managing the business and overseeing it.

Solution: Companies must clearly define the role of the family, the Board, and management. This clarity of roles allows converged views on values and culture, transparency, trust, and communication that includes disclosure of relevant financial and operational information, internal processes of management oversight, and control. The answer lies in the family having clear rules on how the family will work among its members and how the family will work with the business. Decisions should be made in the interest of the business first and not skewed based on the interests of the family.

How Companies Can Prepare for a Smooth Leadership Transition

For strong CEO succession planning, we have identified six best practices that include:

A clear role specification for the CEO

Assessment of the CEO on the basis of performance and potential

Proactive development of internal leadership talent

External scans of potential CEO candidates from the market

A robust CEO integration process

Emergency planning to provide for a sudden or unexpected situation

Although there is broad agreement on these practices, only a small number of family businesses fully apply them. An independent chair should drive the succession process, and if the CEO and Chair roles are combined, he or she must be extremely open-minded and open to self-development.

Having a transparent and fair CEO selection process along with a thoughtful on-boarding process can help the succession process unfold effectively. Our research shows that companies can prosper if they establish good governance as a baseline, preserve family values, identify and develop high-potential executives both within the family and outside it, and bring the right discipline to their CEO succession processes.

Topics Related to this Article

Family Business

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top