Learning from the Crisis, Insurance Embraces Change - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

InsuranceLearning from the Crisis, Insurance Embraces Change

June 2020

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

In the early days of the outbreak of Covid-19 and the weeks following the lockdown all over Europe, Egon Zehnder gathered leaders in the insurance industry across Asia, Europe, and Africa, to share their experiences and discuss how they could leverage each other’s learnings during this crisis and how to best move forward. On the back of this rich discussion, Egon Zehnder facilitated a second round-table just a month later, for leaders to take stock of their response to the pandemic and reflect on the future of their businesses as we start to come out of the lockdown.

Building new processes for new mind-sets

From the onset of the lockdown, insurers globally had the same question on their mind – what will the new normal look like? When governments asked the industry to send their workforce home, leaders were faced with tackling clear operational hurdles such as moving thousands of people onto their remote platforms, keeping employees motivated and engaged, and securing jobs for the long run.

With the sudden move to remote working, the insurance industry has had to find new agility and creativity, which has in turn over the last few months, created a new culture and an opportunity to shift mindsets, in particular around digitalisation.

One multi-regional leader provided a particularly relevant example, saying that in the 3 months of the crisis so far, they had achieved more progress than in the previous 3 years of transformation work. Following years of attempting to build connected regional platforms, the crisis has created a unity around a single problem, allowing this insurer to boost electronic sales capabilities and make unprecedented progress in this area.

Digitalisation, and insurance as a technologically enabled industry was not viewed as obvious. Now our clients have discovered we are a digital company

This internal shift for the insurance workforce has also extended to interactions with their clients. For instance, in China, the industry has launched remote selling end-toend, and engaged their customers through social media platforms such as WeChat and Tencent, a totally previously untested way of connecting to a customer base. This shift in communication was credited across the board, to a new customer mindset. Prior to Covid-19, consumers were sceptical about digitalisation, preferring to interact on their policies and claims face to face, rather than on the various platforms that had been created.

Shifting business models for a well prepared future

Emphasising that this is of course still a journey of learning and discovery, leaders agreed that a way forward is emerging and that the combination of internal culture change combined with the external mind-set shift, will lead to new business models and strategies. Insurers are now looking at strategies around not only what they are selling, but also how they are selling; using the former offline model in conjunction with the new online expertise that they have developed. Furthermore, in addition to looking at new ways of acquiring customers, insurers are having to deal with the retention of current policy holders, who in the face of the crisis are applying greater cash conservation.

Our clients now see we are a b2c company, instead of a b2b2c. This is a good start, now let’s accelerate this change!

Part of the future-ready strategies that are being implemented is around further developing existing tools and platforms in line with the shift in the business model. For instance, while most insurers already had online systems for claims, as one leader explained, the usage was only around 30%. Within a month of the lockdown, usage of the online tools and platforms increased to 70%. Another example of the technological success associated with these new realities has been the increase in telemedicine where usage increased by 100 times to hundreds of thousands of users almost overnight after years of trying unsuccessfully to gain traction with their customers. These types of customer engagements which had initially been pushed as alternatives, have suddenly become the main solution for tomorrow, and navigating the future of the industry going forward will be highly strategic.

Managing public perception

At the forefront of the crisis, the Insurance industry’s resilience has been tested in multiple ways – financially, operationally, in its regulation, and on its reputation. Perhaps one of its largest and potentially far-reaching challenges is managing public perception in the midst of this uncertainty. What emerged clearly from the conversation was that expectations and public perception of the insurance industry vary widely by country and region. As one Head of France for a large multi-national insurer put it, we are in a situation where the population expects the insurance industry to suffer from the crisis. The idea that insurance could be profitable in these times is unfathomable, and the industry is decried in the media by the government and politicians as having a duty to shoulder the entire cost to the country. This feeling was echoed by insurers in the UK, currently grappling with how to navigate becoming a target, while trying to get a positive message out to their customer base.

Insurance is one of the rocks in these times, but people are questioning why it is so solid? The industry needs to survive in the same way that banks need to survive for the economy to survive.

Insurance was created to be here for the long term, going through difficult times is part of the fabric of the industry. However, the expectation gap between what insurance is for – the many paying for the few – and the assumption it can pay out to every business in the world has created an existential issue about the future of insurance and the perception in the marketplace.

One of the great ironies of trying to manage customer loyalty and fulfil public expectation has been the unexpected pressure some insurers have put on others. With non-compete laws in place to protect clients, insurers are not able to speak to each other about the solutions they are offering the public, or align on the type of external communication they want to put out as an industry. As a result, while some insurers with products less affected by the pandemic such a motor insurers have been lowering premiums, this has adversely put pressure on the rest of the market to provide equal benefits and commitments to rebuilding the economy.

Planning for the unknown

Despite so much consensus as to what the main issues and opportunities of today were, our various insurance leaders were left with a few questions unanswered. Which of the economic scenarios that are being projected is the likely one? Will customers stick to these new technologies? Will customer behaviours continue to change, or will they revert to what they were previously? What type of recovery will we see? Will insurers be trusted more or will they have lost the trust of the public?

These are the unknowns on the minds of the industry, with the answers likely to emerge over the next weeks and months. One thing is clear, to address these questions and be ready for them, the rock that is Insurance, viewed as stable, immovable, and safe, will have to flex new muscles, and prove its ability to be agile, flexible, and come out of this stronger.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top