Responding to the Crisis, Insurance Looks Ahead - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

InsuranceResponding to the Crisis, Insurance Looks Ahead

How Insurance Leaders are tackling the ramifications of Covid-19 on the industry

May 2020

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Crisis Mode – Leading through calm communication

From approving claims, to reassuring their workforce, leaders in China, India, the UK, South Africa, Hong Kong, and Singapore, expressed one resounding message – show leadership by expressing calm into the organisation and over communicate.

On the people front, insurance leaders faced the dual task of not only providing protection to their policyholders as the pandemic swept across borders, but also moving to protect their employees, distributors, and safeguard their data.

As distressing as the situation is, as leaders we must stay calm. This is the time people look at us for direction

While the message is the same, each speaker brought a different perspective. One leader likened the company communication to a marathon with multiple sprints, and has been holding regular calls ranging from 1 to 3000 people, to rally morale around various issues including retaining full pay, and securing their jobs. Another demonstrated their care by providing additional medical benefits to their workforce, and one discussed their commitment to providing care to those below the poverty line in their developing markets.

Throughout all these initiatives, one thing is clear, despite conveying a clear direction and sense of stability, these leaders are navigating in unchartered waters and are acutely aware of the dangers the industry is facing. Aside from the influx of claims across health, travel, and life insurance to name a few, moving thousands of people from physical offices to working remotely, has put the insurance industry at high levels of virtual danger with cyber and fraud risk.

Called to Action – Contributing to the wider cause

Following the initial crisis weeks, and with stability successfully projected into the organisations, new objectives around contributing to the wider cause and managing external reputation began to emerge. This shift manifested itself in insurers taking a hard look at the realities of pandemic life and considering ways in which they would play a role in the emerging new world.

With mounting pressure from the public and governments for insurers to step-up to the challenge of helping the public and the economy recover, leaders have had to look at answers that won’t bring the industry down and create even longer term negative outcomes.

There is a lot of pressure for the insurance industry to be part of the solution without much regulatory clarity or a steer clear from governments

The anticipated increase in collaboration with governments will ideally benefit all parties, supporting dislocated business owners, the wider population, and allowing countries to recover their economies. For the insurance industry, the main opportunity would be around redefining practices in the new normal, leaving bad practices behind. Managing the upheaval in the industry while facing the demands of rattled customers calls for a new way forward. This begins with the rules and regulations governing insurance. As an industry with a strict legal framework and non-compete laws prohibiting agreements, insurance companies will need more than their own impetus to adapt to the changes.

A lot of insurance players have been in touch with local regulators to press them to allow new things such as the use of virtual communications

From a government standpoint, taking co-ownership would necessitate greater partnership, especially on the regulatory issues that are so ingrained in the insurance industry. One suggestion included regulators re-examining the rules governing virtual client engagement, a big step given some countries are still wedded to requirements such as “wet ink” signatures and local data storage without the benefit of cloud technology. Some governments such as Singapore have already been part of this shift, with the regulator agreeing on balance sheet relief and extending premiums for the population through a government backed website. Creating a successful future for the industry and its customers will require support from all fronts, including regulators, and policy makers.

Looking Ahead – Finding the New Normal

Whatever may take place in individual countries, COVID-19 presents global opportunities for the industry. It is a chance, said some leaders, for customers to realize they are underinsured. It is also an opportunity for insurance businesses to recognize the potential in further digitalization of their businesses, one leader describing his new commitment to digital training for its distribution team. This can only be a plus for the industry, he said.

The period of dislocation will be disruptive. But managed well, it’s an opportunity to harness the best instincts of the industry’s workforce. Leaders across life insurance in particular spoke about their employees seeing the impact of their work on customers in these difficult times. They described their renewed burst of drive and motivation as well as pride to their leaders with one employee quoted saying “I used to think I had an administrative job. Now I have a real sense of purpose”, a feeling of hope that was echoed by many on the call.

Going forward, the industry will look back at their actions and reaction during this time of crisis. How successful will the strategies to keep employees engaged remotely through a combination of over-communication and technological development be? Were the new policies around the payment of shareholder dividends the right ones? Will a strong industry voice emerge from this to communicate insurance needs to government officials? And finally, how will the decision to fund insurance that had been specifically designed to not include pandemics be viewed and remembered in history?

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Finance

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top