Moving Towards Remote Organizations - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Transformational Development ProgramsMoving Towards Remote Organizations

How to apply holistic leadership to shape a desirable next normal

July 2020

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Never let a crisis go to waste

COVID-19 started as a health pandemic but has quickly also become a major social and economic crisis. Resilient companies, however, are successfully adapting their business models to the new circumstances while seeking novel ways to take advantage of the altered reality.

It is becoming increasingly evident that remote working is more than a COVID-19 phenomenon or an intellectual or academic thought experiment. Instead, the new working mode has now been proven to suit people’s needs, with many reporting higher satisfaction and reduced stress levels.

Remote settings also offer benefits to employers and society at large, ranging from cost savings thanks to reduced office space to omitted greenhouse emissions thanks to less business travel. Such potential encourages executives to rethink the modus operandi and develop strategies for a faster, more agile, and gradually digitalized future.

There is no such thing as a free lunch

Until recently, it seemed that companies either provided individual flexibility or ensured collective alignment, but rarely both. In fact, leading players have long recognized the perks of offering employees greater working flexibility. This boosts employee well-being, which in turn increases productivity, and also provides companies access to global talent pools and allows them to relieve overcrowded office space.

Yet, some of these same companies turned their backs on the idea of remote working, fearing the absence of crucial water-cooler conversations, social interaction, and a lack of innovation. Furthermore, managers seemed frightened by the idea of losing control of their teams.

Until the lockdown, however, when an overwhelming majority of people and organizations found working from home to be a positive experience. Employees mostly enjoyed the gained flexibility, while employers overcame fears of losing strategic focus and execution power. It follows that greater flexibility and improved strategic alignment are not mutually exclusive, rather, if managed actively, a desired state of flexibility-enhanced alignment.

The whole is more than the sum of its parts

It is one thing to work remotely for a couple of weeks during lockdown, but an entirely different story to move towards working from home ad infinitum. Therefore, a further challenge for leaders lies in addressing future long-term effects of virtual settings.

To find the right balance between flexibility and alignment and to keep employees energized, executives need to assess potential pain points at all organizational levels. Only those executives who respond to individual and team-related needs, as well as organizational and cultural implications of the emergent state are likely to eventually succeed.

The inherent complexity is not meant to drive managers in the direction of pre-COVID methods, but instead motivate them to take a holistic view when tackling the four steps outlined below.

All good things come in fours

Leaders can promote lasting, positive change for their organizations by exploiting the following four levers that pave the way towards more remote organizations.

Stories people want to live

The new normal requires developing a meaningful narrative that helps people grasp what is expected of them, respectively how they can contribute to the business purpose going forward. For people to want to live the story, it needs to resonate with their inner values and deepest convictions. Thus, employers should take time to seek an in-depth understanding of their employees’ current realities, perceptions and emotional states. “Crowd sourcing” can be a powerful tool to bring to light creative ideas from within the organization that help maintain high energy levels and a joint sense of working towards meaningful goals.

A home for the next normal

Secondly, holistically minded leaders should ensure that the organizational infrastructure seamlessly supports the suggested narrative. This is likely to require a fundamental change in the office set-up, creating a “home” for office activities in the next normal. For some companies, this could mean redefining the role of the office to the point where it mainly serves as a venue for creative work and social gatherings, consisting of project and event rooms. For others, shared workspaces with other companies might be the way forward. New office concepts will need less space, while bringing to life beautiful, inspiring, and diverse environments that further dissolve boundaries between different companies and society at large.

Forms that fluidly follow function

Thirdly, companies should take advantage of the current opportunity to rethink and adjust their core processes and organizational structures. Executives will, for instance, need to find virtual ways to select and onboard employees in a world where people rarely physically meet. Moreover, the role of organizational structures in facilitating collaboration is reinforced by the recent circumstances. Smaller, cross-functional teams can help to ensure close collaboration despite virtual settings. At the same time, working from home deemphasizes team boundaries, allowing organizations to introduce more fluid set-ups, in which powerful teams are formed spontaneously based on situational needs.

Adapting new working styles

Lastly, working from home requires executives and employees to adopt new mindsets and skills. Many executives need to fundamentally adjust their style of holding meetings, ensuring clarity and accountability, and applying technology.

Moreover, a key challenge relates to emotional intelligence, as the next normal requires elevated levels of trust and delegation, as well as empathy and care. What could easily be mistaken for business-as-usual in a virtual setting actually requires executives’ willingness to alter long-established habits and routines.

On the employee side, key learning goals include self-management and personal resilience. Not surprisingly, people who effectively manage themselves and successfully deal with adversity are those who enrich organizations the most.

Even the longest journey begins with a single step

The idea of designing a next normal might cause excitement as well as stress in executives. Luckily, there is no need to entirely reinvent the wheel. Working from home has gained momentum over the last decade, with more and more companies offering creative ways to balance employee flexibility and corporate alignment. Executives can therefore seek inspiration from other companies, experimenting with different successful and inspirational approaches, ultimately working out which elements work best for their own firms.

Constructing a future-ready next normal is not a gimmick, but a necessity for leaders. Managers who holistically approach this task and take advantage of COVID-19 related changes to experiment with new work concepts would eventually harness the benefits associated with both, namely working from the office and working from home. Moreover, they are likely to be rewarded with a competitive edge over rivals.

While major changes have already taken place, the situation calls for leaders to actively shape increasingly remote organizations. In doing so, they can refer to the introduced framework and steps. Ultimately, executives will be judged by the way they convert COVID-19 circumstances into work-related improvements. In this regard, executives should not just settle for any next normal, but make use of the opportunity to evolve corporate models and cultures to enhance people’s lives.

With the kind support of Max Reichel.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top