Audit Committee Report: Danger Ahead - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesAudit Committee Report: Danger Ahead

July 2020

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Audit committees exist to flag dangers. And they are seeing a new series of threats to enterprise looming ahead in the next year.

Egon Zehnder gathered two groups of audit chairs from some of the country’s largest companies, spanning multiple industries, for teleconference calls in June to discuss the ways in which COVID-19 has impacted their work. Many raised concerns about enterprise risks that are emerging from the pandemic – and the pandemic response.

Security Alert

Most pressing, committee members said, is the COVID-created cyber security hazard. While relocating workers into home offices was a necessary safety measure at the start of the pandemic, now the security dangers are emerging as a substantial exposure.

Hackers are taking advantage of the global business disruption. “There’s been a discernable uptick in attacks, such a phishing” said one board member. The board has been briefed on a series of “near misses” in which infiltrators gained entry but were thwarted by internal controls, he said.

The remote workforce remains a vulnerability, said another who is on the board of a company with more than 100 million members in its customer base. The move to home offices exposed the firm. “There is so much personal information. It was hard enough to control in call centers. Once you push all that out into people’s homes, the risk goes up exponentially,” he said.

Another agreed, listing home office printers and laptops as a rising security issue. “People are printing and saving on their hard drives at home. They can’t use a VPN because of technical difficulties. Internet services aren’t that great. We have to remind people to clean their hard drives because they’re vulnerable to intrusion. It’s a big issue for us.”

In addition to outside actors, companies need to be on the lookout for security risks from within. With remote work still the norm for many companies, audit committee members say enterprises can’t rely on traditional methods to notice disgruntled employees. “When you’re not able to pick up on the normal cues, how do you find the internal problems?’ said one.

Regulatory Overdrive

Another looming source of concern: eager regulators. Audit chairs report governmental authorities, empowered to take steps to protect health and safety, are flexing their muscles and pressuring companies in new ways.

“We’re seeing regulatory creep because we do a lot of business in China,” said one. “We’ve had calls from the White House about selling in China. The White House is not happy about this.”

Another board member worried about the ripple effects of governments taking on more power. “Government has gotten back to regulating more than they used to,” he said. “It harkens back to periods when governments overstepped and created a backlash.” As an example, this board member cited ex-New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s efforts to regulate soda sizes in city restaurants. “That kind of outlook could lead to more regulatory risk in social and work environments,” the board member said.

Workplace Impact

To be sure, some notable positives emerged from the lockdown. The use of remote meetings expanded participation and laid the groundwork for exploration into new work habits. “Using Zoom for everything meant we could include a whole bunch of people who wouldn’t necessarily travel for a board meeting,” said one. “It allowed the board to be more inclusive.”

The completion of a full virtual quarter proved inspirational, said another. “It opened up a number of opportunities,” she said. “Things we were fearful about in the past are now not as scary.”

But while initial remote work proved successful, now it is showing its challenges. The lack of regular contact, in meetings and less formal settings, is limiting to professional advancement. “You can have a job working from home, but I’m not sure you can have a career working from home,” said one board member.

Looking ahead, audit chairs expect a period of near-term turbulence and hard decisions. Companies will need to take action regarding staffing levels and compensation in light of the new economic realities. Many have had to close operations. Some will have to make “quick, hard decisions,” said one. The questions will be challenging ones. “What is the reputational impact on how we treat our people now? What can we afford? What is the right thing to do?” she said.

Almost everyone has seen business drop and that will have impact going forward, said another. “We’re going to have some really hard calls to make. The next quarter or two, there will be really tough conversations at the board level.”

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Finance

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top