Virus Sparks Digital Push In Asia - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

DigitalVirus Sparks Digital Push In Asia

June 2020

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Even when the COVID-19 outbreak is contained, it is unlikely things will return to pre-virus normal. Financial Services is one industry that may well be forever changed by the pandemic. Already, institutions in Asia are starting to see an acceleration of digital transformation.

Egon Zehnder convened a roundtable with a dozen senior banking and FinTech leaders from across North and South Asia. They shared their perspectives on how the COVID pandemic has created both challenges and opportunities and how they plan to pivot their organizations to respond.

Digital is no longer just a buzzword

Traditional banks that may have added some digital elements as “window dressing” in the past are now under pressure to embrace true digital transformation. Consumers are showing new willingness to use digital alternatives. Already there is a ~ 20-30% YOY increase in seniors above 60, who have started to use Internet banking; separately a two-and-half fold jump in purchase of investments online.

Over 650,000 new online customers made at least one e-commerce transaction online in the last few months, said one banking leader. At one of the digital bank’s soft-launch in Hong Kong thousands applied for a credit card on the first day.

Financial institutions and governments are following the consumer lead. Asia has opened up its banking ecosystem to new players. Eight new digital bank licenses have been awarded in Hong Kong, five new ones will emerge from Singapore. There will be even more competition from non-banks, across ASEAN in the next 12-24 months. “Some have built the digital bank in less than 12 months, so technology is less of the challenge. What’s important is how we solve for the customer need and how well we execute,” said one banking leader in Hong Kong. The key, he said, is to focus on ways to make digital use permanent. For this, companies will need to anticipate customer needs and design new products around them.

The future of money is digital. Asia is in a prime position to lead

Governments are embracing stimulus efforts to help their economies but there are doubts about the efficiency of the financial distribution system. Already companies and Central Banks globally are looking at technological ways to channel stimulus directly to ordinary people and small businesses, cutting out traditional commercial banks.

Facebook plans to launch its own global payment network called Libra. Central Banks have responded with efforts such as China’s Digital Bank Currency/Electronic Payment. The Bank of England and also Bank for International Settlements (BIS) initiatives will accelerate their support of digital assets. China is undertaking government-backed tests in four urban areas, which have a combined population of more than 40 million citizens. In emerging countries such as Cambodia, the National Bank of Cambodia (NBC) aims to launch a retail central bank backed digital currency (CBDC), to encourage financial inclusion. There is an expectation that the Central Bank Digital Currency (CDBC) will be a big topic post COVID, particularly in large emerging countries.

Further fueling the demand for digital assets are the investors who wish to diversify their portfolio and protect against inflation. The volume of digital asset fundraising and M&A deals are growing in Asia. A FinTech leader proclaimed: “Asia will be the heart of Crypto. US and EU are still stuck in analog infrastructure while Asia is embracing the technology to have online life.”

There was a unanimous agreement amongst the banking leaders for making cross border exchange of payments electronic and to settle in real time. “Wholesale is our biggest bet (for digital assets). It will be cheaper and more efficient,” said one.

Many will learn from Singapore

Singapore has been at the forefront of digital change. The country took a deliberate stand to study the landscape, roll out progressive policies to build out a digital infrastructure, before issuing new digital bank licenses. Measures included having a national digital identity system (‘My Info on Singpass’), a trusted data infrastructure to enable data sharing in a consenting way (this will facilitate KYC/onboarding) and an open, interoperable payment system for everyone (Paynow/FAST). “Already we are seeing a ~ 6X increase in the use of electronic payments, leveraging on the national rails” said one of the banking leaders. This has created a resilient foundation for all banks and FinTechs to flow billions of dollars through the system while enabling the players to focus on what they should be doing – to provide differentiated services.

While many other countries can learn from the Singapore experience, they will proceed at differing rates of change. Leading banks in Singapore and Hong Kong launched online banks as early as 2002. Current efforts are centered on reimaging the customer journey and completing the last mile in this journey by removing ‘paper friction’ and by automating operations. Other countries are catching up. In India, the Adhaar infrastructure has accelerated the digitization of economy. However, there is a lot of debate on security and privacy, said one leader. “We need to move to the cloud to be operating efficiently and to scale. The regulations need to support that. Video KYC is approved but not yet in flight…there is much we can learn from other countries also from industries like Telecommunications. It is not an overnight process.”

Boon for B2B FinTechs

“This will be a golden era for B2B players who partner with banks,’ said one investor. “ The B2C story has been a subsidized growth story and if anyone has a negative margin, they are completely exposed at this moment; investors here will be more selective.”

FinTech investors envision consumers, merchants, incumbents and governments “crossing the chasm” into digital over the next two years, a move that will drive company value and valuation. Further investments will be made to boost this sector, particularly in South East Asia, a region with over 650 million people and fast growing e-commerce powerhouse, said one established FinTech investor. However, the future will also likely see a decrease in availability of risk capital overall, highlighting the opportunity for investors that are willing to deploy capital in the near term, he added.

Banking won’t be the only beneficiary of investment, said another FinTech leader. “There is a high conviction investing in digitization of financial services, insurance and health.” It is encouraging to see that the crisis is forcing the industry to think about how we can share the health burden through a renewed focus on ‘digital health’, one that leverages on integration between financial services (credit and insurance) and technology (digital solutions).

A Talent War is Coming

A FinTech policy expert predicts that countries will seek to diversify their supply chains and focus on domestic recovery. This will eventually lead towards a war for local talent.

“There will be a reverse talent flight. Every country will want to attract their home talent back. There will be an increase demand for local talents to be retained with a price,” he said. With that, we expect financial institutions to be more open to digital talent from other industries in attempts to build out a more customer-centered, agile and collaborative organization.

Keeping current talent is also a priority. Leaders are working to ensure the work-from-home arrangements are engaging. “Our developers don’t want to work from home. We quickly worked with our team to bring in an online development dashboard,” said one.

Warning: Don’t Miss The Innovation Opportunity

Risk aversion can be a barrier towards successful innovation. Leaders will need to balance between stability but still invest into customer driven innovation to differentiate themselves, to attract new customers and also retain existing ones. Now is the time to experiment and act.

Perhaps the greatest opportunity for innovation lies in the potential for collaborative efforts. Having a competitive approach may get us to a better place faster, but greater public-private collaboration will help all achieve sustainable outcomes. The pandemic has driven greater social-environmental-economic collaboration between all players; Government, Banks, FinTechs, Investors and Citizens. All must prioritize efforts to further develop the digital ecosystem. The time for “window dressing” efforts has passed.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Digital

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top