How Industrial Sector P&L Leaders Are Handling COVID-19 Challenges - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

IndustrialBeyond Keeping the Lights On

How Industrial Sector P&L Leaders Are Handling COVID-19 Challenges

April 2020

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Senior P&L leaders have a crucial role to play in the COVID-19 crisis. On one hand, they are the ones who are accountable to their CEOs and the Board for “keeping the lights on” in the business. On the other hand, they are the ones on the decision-making front lines of their businesses, making and implementing extraordinarily difficult choices within their own employee footprint and business scope, and with regard to their suppliers, customers, and business partners. To find out how they are tackling these challenges,

Egon Zehnder hosted a virtual meeting with senior divisional CEOs and P&L leaders from the industrial sector in Europe. Four major themes emerged from our gathering:

Immediate priorities

Short term vs. Long term

Personal leadership and role-modelling

Mental health

Current Concerns and Priorities

The two biggest concerns that leaders highlighted almost unanimously were the health and safety of staff as well as employee engagement and protecting supply chains so the company can continue to deliver to customers.

For those working in multinational, multi-site businesses, the key priority and concern was the health and wellbeing of their staff. Enforcing social distancing, personal protection, and other safety measures were the initial steps of their crisis management strategy, and the majority of attendees felt confident in their businesses’ response. “We moved to put in place social distancing and hygiene in February, so we feel safe and under control from this standpoint,” one executive shared. In some industries, such as food production and packaging, the crisis has led to a sudden increase in demand, and consideration has to be given to ensure HSE standards are maintained so as not to cut corners and put staff at risk.

After the protection of employees, maintaining an uninterrupted supply chain given the difficulties around materials supply and secure freight was the second most discussed topic. How to service demand through logistics and supply chain was the issue raised by all the executives at our gathering, who represent across the supply chain.

From a customer perspective, the group has seen different approaches. Some have issued blanket letters informing their suppliers they won’t be paying anyone for the foreseeable future. Others have been more strategic. “We’re thinking about their suppliers and identifying who they will need in long term and helping in the short term to secure their future,” on leader said. The consensus was that the industry needs a collaborative response to supply chain management and to position themselves best for a post-COVID world.

Balancing Short- Versus Long-Term Planning

During crisis periods, balancing short-term, tactical initiatives with longer-term business decisions is critical in defining how a business fares during and after a crisis. As one executive summed up: “We are very aware to balance firefighting with strategic planning.” Cash and liquidity are critical but continuing to invest in the business on a longer-term basis is important in a post-COVID world.

Further complexity is added, as the true extent of COVID-19 has yet to be realized, and forecasting has become almost impossible to accurately report. Some attendees reported an increase in demand and business activity, other businesses are experiencing a slowdown in operations, and others are experiencing both across their business units. All participants agreed on the importance of thoughtful business and scenario planning. “We have our CFO leading our longer-term strategy, our budgeting process is already having to be thought about, and we have mapped out about 100+ different scenarios,” an executive shared. “That’s the level of forecasting efforts.”

Governments present particular forecasting challenges for multinational, multi-site companies, as every country has its own regulations and requirements. There is also a lack of clarity on the degree of government support and intervention to expect, adding to the complexity and affecting decision-making.

Leading for Your Employees

As business leaders, a sound communication strategy is imperative to ensure everyone is clear on the role they have to play, and goes a long way to easing employees’ anxiety around the business state. The executives on the call unanimously discussed the importance of leading from the front, trying to be as visible as possible, and striking a balance between communicating reward and recognition to staff.

In terms of direct reports, faced with an unprecedented situation, teams have had to work together and be more collaborative than before. “It is has created a more democratic leadership, rather than directional,” one leader pointed out. Leaders have had to adapt quickly to new methods of communication and can feel constrained as informal interface becomes difficult to create.

Running a business using a laptop, executives need to be aware of “keeping one eye on the telescope and one eye on microscope,” as one executive put it. Those who are used to extensive travel are feeling less effective working from home, feeling that they are not as visible on the frontlines without be able to visit plants. Our group was highly aware of the broader employee base they lead, and employees’ key concerns—primarily job safety and compensation. Unions are also an important stakeholder to maintain communication with. Decisions have been made in some companies to cut executive and Board pay by up to 25 percent in order to show their commitment to safeguarding jobs. Others are recognizing their staff going “above and beyond” by going ahead with pay increases or keeping company canteens open and providing free meals.

We Need to Talk About Mental Health

The combination of dramatic changes in daily routine, isolation from friends and family, media consumption, and economic instability can have significant impact on peoples’ mental health. Based on the discussion, it would seem that now, more than ever, businesses are prioritizing mental health discourse, and leaders are taking responsibility for providing support and, practical aid to their employees. Communicating regularly to employees through newsletters, and providing new channels of support is proving effective for a number of businesses.

Looking Toward the Future

While what the post-pandemic world will look like is too soon to tell, but there is a hope that some of the key priorities now can remain. A greater focus on employee well-being, more informal communications between leaders and staff, and increased transparency in the organization may well be some of the positive aspects that companies are able to retain after the crisis.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

CEO

Leadership

Industrial

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top