Effective Boards in Uncertain Times: The CEO’s Trusted Partner for Growth and Risk - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesEffective Boards in Uncertain Times: The CEO’s Trusted Partner for Growth and Risk

November 2025

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Uncertainty is the key word of the day. From geopolitical tensions to economic instability, CEOs are leading in a consistently unpredictable environment. At a recent gathering of public company CEOs and directors in Atlanta, we asked the CEOs: Who is your best resource for discussing and making sense of the challenges when navigating uncertainty? The top four responses were: my senior leadership team, other CEOs outside of my company, my board of directors and my board chair.

Senior leadership teams truly in the trenches with the CEO, living through uncertainty and operational pressures in real time.

CEO peers who are “in the fight” rather than observing it bring a sense of currency and diverse vantage points on fast-changing topics, including geopolitics, AI and trade tariffs.

Boards offer experience but may lack real-time operational experience, which may make it challenging to be current at the speed that issues like AI require.

Board chairs can be invaluable—if trust and role clarity exist. Chairs must guide without directing, ensuring the board is a resource, not a hurdle.

These responses echo the findings of Egon Zehnder’s latest CEO survey, which found that 1,235 CEOs globally turn first and foremost to their executive teams (75%), followed by other CEOs (43%), independent board of directors (28%) and the Chair (23%). The study also found that CEOs are accepting constant uncertainty and responding with higher levels of adaptability.

How Chairs Can Help CEOs Maximize Board Value

For boards to effectively support CEOs and senior leadership, directors should actively challenge and guide management on strategy, risk, and capital allocation—without becoming operationally involved. A strong Chair helps maintain this balance, built on trust and clear roles with the CEO. Role clarity prevents power struggles and ensures productive tension, especially under time pressure.

Beyond role clarity, it’s essential to define the rules of engagement, especially when there are extenuating circumstances such as activists and M&A. (In these circumstances, it can be useful to consider establishing temporary board committees to address complex decisions, including major acquisitions, activist engagement and more).

An effective chair curates the board’s composition, manages dynamics, and channels board time to focus on the CEO’s and company’s most important needs. This approach concentrates expertise and accelerates decision-making without bogging down the full board. One company described two acquisitions that were shepherded through a subcommittee approved by the board and composed by the chair.

Another key area to define when, where and how the board should be involved is talent. While most CEOs at our gathering noted a clear division of labor—management leads executive hiring decisions, but values board participation during the latter stages of fit and alignment. This assures candidates that management and the board are aligned and reassures the board that leadership composition is thoughtfully managed. Final selection remains with management. It also pays to have the board engaged on talent, as they can keep an eye toward patterns or gaps among the senior leadership team.

How CEOs Are Using AI Now

CEOs noted a distinct shift from using discrete AI tools to using AI agents to act as virtual teammates—complete with email addresses, role credentials and defined responsibilities. These AI agents are embedded in hybrid teams, working alongside people, and offering superhuman access to data and high-speed analytics. Using AI agents has helped with productivity gains. One CEO shared that in marketing, there was a 500% increase in digital asset creation, which includes images, videos and content, with no headcount increase over the prior year. Another added that they saw a 300-400% increase in productivity in customer service, reducing response times from about 3 hours to only 15 minutes.

How quickly AI is embedded across an organization comes back to how quickly teams can scale it. CEOs highlighted two paths to doing so:

Top-down Coordination with Functional “AI Navigators”

One CEO shared that their company transitioned from grassroots experimentation to a top-down program. They appointed an AI navigator in every function—30+ leaders across the company—to drive adoption in both high-volume standardized processes and messy, cross-functional ones. Notably, the leader appointed to orchestrate AI did not come from a pure data-science background; instead, the company chose a head of supply chain with a track record of large-scale transformation and paired that leader with a strategy leader. They kept the emphasis on execution at enterprise scale.

Digital Fluency First, Then Agile Sprints for High-Impact Use Cases
Another CEO noted that their company invested two years in building digital fluency across leadership tiers (the executive leadership team and vice presidents), establishing a common language. Then they curated a portfolio of high-impact AI projects and ran short sprints to test hypotheses, gather results, and iterate, with a pipeline of additional projects behind the first wave. Real-time practice displaced theory and created a cadence of “learn, test, recalibrate.”

Looking ahead, CEOs anticipate AI playing a bigger role in consumer engagement and brand experience that goes beyond traditional client relationship management.

Keeping up with the rapid changes in AI and other technologies is no small feat, and it can be an even greater challenge for board members who are no longer acting executives and not experiencing the pressures of a daily operating environment. This is why ongoing board education is a governance responsibility. This continuing education goes beyond security and compliance, ensuring the full board has a baseline knowledge on how AI and other technologies could reshape the business model, cost structure, customer experience and competitive landscape so they can be informed in their oversight responsibilities.

CEOs shared several approaches they are using, including bringing in external educators such as platform companies or strategy firms to brief the board on AI and related technologies using live demonstrations and case studies; inviting law firms to discuss AI governance, data risk and regulatory horizons, and engaging in joint CEO-board learning sessions to build shared fluency and inform strategy conversations. Paramount to this ongoing education is determining the appropriate cadence and topic refreshment to ensure you are keeping pace with how quickly technologies and external factors are changing.

Using the Board’s Time Wisely

Many boards spend a disproportionate amount of time on compliance, financial minutiae, and procedural updates. Attendees advocated for reclaiming time for strategy and innovation at every meeting, not just once a year. One suggestion was to have three slides at the start of a meeting that cover “Since we last met” with concise bullet points summarizing major developments since the previous meetings. This quickly grounds everyone on the starting point of the meeting before moving into more detailed topics. In addition, a “So what?” style executive summary can also help directors to zero in on what matters now, focusing on what’s going well, what isn’t and what help is needed from the board.

A small but insightful point is to keep the formats of board presentations consistent across quarterly meetings. Directors only see materials periodically and consistent layouts help reduce cognitive friction, keeping the focus on what is in the materials and not orienting themselves to a new style.

Lastly, don’t go overboard with pre-reads. If you include a document, have a good reason for doing so and expect the board members to read it. Use appendices sparingly because every document presented carries liability implications. Before adding a document, ask if it answers foreseeable questions if you are adding it “just in case.”

The Chair must be a good steward of the board’s time, adhering to the agenda, ending tangential conversations and keeping the discussions focused at the right altitude (i.e., not in the weeds of operations), and ensuring enough time is spent on the CEO’s most pressing issues. Post-meeting, the Chair and the CEO should debrief, and the Chair can offer direct feedback to the CEO about the pacing, depth and any instances where the conversation drifted into tactical operations.

Time is something no board member has enough of—the National Association of Corporate Directors notes that annual independent director time commitment has risen to more than 300 hours over the last 10 years. Some attendees at our gathering questioned whether longer meetings and more frequent sessions might become the new norm, given the expansion of risk domains and general uncertainty in the operating environment. Some participants suggested implementing dedicated technology or strategy sessions in addition to regular meetings.

Amid all the uncertainty, if boards invest in continuing education, building strong partnerships with the CEO and honing their agility, they will be best poised to help their organizations make highly informed, critical decisions and be a true resource for the CEO.

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Leading in Complexity

Leadership Development

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top