Trial by Fire – First-time CEOs Discuss Their Experience Handling the COVID-19 Pandemic - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

CEO SearchTrial by Fire – First-time CEOs During a Pandemic

April 2020

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Being a CEO is hard. Becoming a first-time CEO is harder. But imagine stepping into your first CEO role at the start of the pandemic.

Egon Zehnder gathered a group that doesn’t need to think about this – it’s their reality. We organized a videoconference of first-time CEOs in early April, half of whom stepped into their jobs in 2020 and the rest of whom joined no more than a few months earlier.

For this group, we were eager to ask not about their business, but about them. What are they learning about themselves and about leadership? What has been the hardest? Where is the silver lining that they did not expect?

Our take-away is that these leaders are discovering the benefits of intensely focused leadership that is required in this moment. They simply cannot focus on everything (a common trap for first-time CEOs) and have to focus on two things: their people and the short-term (not even medium-term) impact of COVID-19 on their business.

We asked what word they would use to describe this experience. The two most commonly cited words were community and opportunity. In simplifying like this, these leaders have been energized by the work, exhausted by the intensity and the loneliness, and inspired by new opportunity.

One leader remarked at how the crisis accelerated some necessary processes. He had been hard at work hiring a leadership team when the pandemic hit. Now, “I’m announcing next week that almost every senior role is filled – 2/3 of whom I haven’t met in person.” Necessity pushed the “normal” to the back burner, he said.

Like many in isolation, the CEOs found they’ve learned a lot about how much can be accomplished without face-to-face contact. “I’m shocked how much we get done without being in the room,” said one.

Another CEO was pleasantly surprised to see new leaders emerging from the ranks. “Green shoots,” he called them. And one more was stunned by the response of the factory employees. “We have three factories. We asked all 300 factory workers what they wanted to do: go to work, stay home, etc. They wanted to work. And in the last 3 weeks we had the lowest absenteeism ever. Employees say they want to be safe, to come to work, and to be productive.”

Several said they are using humor to diffuse tension and build camaraderie. “I do a weekly Peloton session and anyone can join me. My humiliation sparks others’ spirits,” said one. Having a moment of fun on virtual calls can be part of that process, said another. “We can meet the cat, meet the baby. We’re in people’s homes and that’s an opportunity to be less formal and the build personal bonds.” Another said, “There’s no more pretending that you don’t have a personal life or family commitments.”

The lack of formality can help a new leader build authenticity. “I share silly stories and open up. We’re all dealing with the same stuff – Hey, new hair cut? Sorry, my kids need something, etc.,” she said. “When you connect outside of the traditional corporate environment, positions and titles go out the window,” another said.

As our conversation unfolded, our group confessed it is lonely at the top. “It’s hard for me to feel like I can have open, honest conversations about tough decisions,” said one. They feel caught in between conversations with the Board that debated worst-case scenarios and all-hands that need to remain cautiously optimistic yet realistic.

Some new CEOs say the crisis has forced them to step in and protect their employees in unexpected ways. “We are owned by a PE firm. I had to suggest to the board that we talk less frequently about financials. The team was getting crushed,” recounted one CEO. “The board knows we have a focused, disciplined plan and there’s plenty of runway to manage forward. That’s enough for now,” he said. “I invited too much involvement early but learned quickly that I had to shift.” Interestingly to us, many of these CEOs had found courage normally only seen in experienced CEOs – they have already learned to respectfully push back on their Boards, while creating a more ad hoc Board dialogue to keep engagement flowing.

Our gathered leaders worried that as the initial shock of the crisis wears off, and as we realize it’s still a long road ahead, new challenges are looming. They are watching for:

Fatigue. How will we all be able to keep up our efforts when the first burst of adrenalin wears off?

Planning. How long can businesses function without visibility? “There’s no more annual planning. Now it’s just 90 days,” said one. “We are tempering expectations.”

Survivor’s Guilt: How will those who remain cope emotionally with what has happened to their co-workers and friends?

As difficult as recent weeks have been, the biggest challenges may yet be ahead. Said one leader: “What happens when we work from home but need to call in sick? Or someone wants to accelerate but others don’t keep pace? Or someone wants a late night Zoom after kids go to bed, but that doesn’t work for others?” These are the issues that will plague leaders in the coming months, he said. “We’re just in a triage phase and just getting through a moment. I need to create a durable, new way of working that has to set in culturally. I’m scratching my head to figure out what things I need to push to normalize going forward.”

The CEOs who joined us were determined to find opportunity amidst the struggle. For some, crisis management has allowed them to accelerate a cultural change they were hired to execute on. For others, they were seeing unexpected and rapid growth in their business, which gave them a reason to scale processes more urgently. And all of them have realized that the crucible of crisis has helped them forge new leadership teams.

We were inspired by the candor and clarity of these first-time CEOs, who are taking a crash course in crisis leadership. They are learning that authenticity and focus helps those around them, but they also need to take care of themselves while COVID-19’s impacts drag on.

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

COVID-19

Disruption

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top