Managing the Trickiest Parts of a Family Business - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Family Business AdvisoryHarvard Business Review – Managing the Trickiest Parts of a Family Business

Serving on any board of directors is hard, but in a family-owned business, it’s even harder.

January 2020

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Learning to move through uncomfortable issues like leadership succession, compensation, and performance of management constructively is one of the biggest challenges that boards of family businesses face. That came across clearly in a series of interviews we conducted with 19 external and family member directors of major businesses in six countries in early 2019. Those discussions surfaced the most common taboos, as well as approaches for addressing them. They also highlighted, as one director described it, “the additional interpersonal skills and courage to deal with the issues that the board has to have.”

CEO Succession

Choosing a successor to the CEO can be an extremely sensitive topic in a family business. The relative currently at the top may even be deeply resistant to the notion of being replaced—and vocal about it.  The people we spoke with had some advice about how to encourage open and honest discussions on the subject:

Build trust.

Assess independently.

Be transparent.

Next-Generation Talent Development

Figuring out how to bring the next cohort of potential leaders in early enough to learn the business and gain the skills needed to run it is another major challenge. If directors don’t tackle this, a lot can go wrong. When two third-generation family members were offered executive roles, they declined—leaving the business with no successors. Here are some suggestions for preparing young family members for roles in the business:

Agree on the rules before they’re needed.

Codify the rules.

Create a compensation committee of independent directors

Underperforming Family Executives

One of the thorniest problems is how to deal with family executives who aren’t doing their jobs well. There are several ways to nip it in the bud. Ideally, family members in the business should report to non-family bosses, who get the reinforcement they need to provide regular, honest assessments. But that's not always the case. Below are a few ways to deal with underperforming family executives:

Non-family supervisors should be given clear direction on expectations regarding how they support and evaluate next-gen members.

As family members ascend levels, give more oversight by a committee of board members with the engagement of HR.

Assign every family executive  a coach or a mentor.

Put struggling family members on an improvement plan. if they can’t, offered other opportunities in the business where they can succeed or a path to an exit.

For underperforming CEOs, have the lead independent director introduce a “long-term” succession process that starts with designing the ideal future CEO profile and clearly defining the performance expectations. Then the board can suggest comparing current CEO performance with the ideal to identify gaps and areas for development and quantify the opportunity cost of keeping the current CEO.

To continue reading, click the link below.

Read the Full Article

Full story: Sonny Iqbal, German Herrera and Jennifer Pendergast: Managing the Trickiest Parts of a Family Business, Harvard Business Review (23 January 2020)

Topics Related to this Article

Family Business

Board

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top