How Trying Times are Bringing out the Best in Corporate Ingenuity and Leadership - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Transformational Development ProgramsCorporate Ingenuity in Trying Times: How Top Leaders Are Making a Difference During the COVID-19 Pandemic

March 2020

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Whether creatively redeploying production to manufacture critical necessities, working with customers to understand urgent needs, offering charity or using technology for good in these trying times, companies are making a difference through ingenuity.

The COVID-19 global pandemic is also creating seminal moments for leaders who are guiding their businesses through uncharted territory and managing unorthodox ways of operating. At Egon Zehnder, we call this leadership for a better world; that is, when leaders quickly innovate for the broader benefit of society and help us find a sense of calm amid chaos.

Who’s Leading for a Better World

As the world grapples with new realities, the ways in which business leaders are stepping up to take action suggests we’re seeing a promising new paradigm. How they adapted their business missions in the context of greater global needs will be an important takeaway from current events and perhaps an influencer on where they stand once we come through this crisis.

Now, many companies in a range of industries are rising to help increase the supply of in-demand items like sanitizer, masks, disinfectants and ventilators. Examples of those shifting their operations to produce life-saving materials include:

Large corporations in China, including Alibaba, Baidu, Bank of China, JD.com, Tencent and Xiaomi, set up makeshift assembly lines to produce additional masks and disinfectants. LVMH shifted production in its perfume factories to produce hand sanitizer, which it then delivered to French health authorities and hospitals free of charge. Independent brewer BrewDog is using its distillery to produce sanitizer for those in need, as are French beauty companies L’Oréal and Coty.

Inditex, owner of Zara, will manufacture hospital gowns in its clothing factories, and also pledges to donate masks to patients and health officials in Spain. Miroglio Group, an Italian textiles firm, is making face masks that meet medical requirements, producing up to 75,000 a day if needed. Chinese apparel manufacturers Erdos and Cabbeen are volunteering to convert clothing production for masks and protective suits.

Meggitt is leading a consortium of organizations (including GKN, Thales and Renishaw) to adapt aerospace oxygen converter factories for ventilator production, while Italian car makers, Ferrari and Fiat Chrysler are supporting the nation’s biggest ventilator manufacturer to boost production.

In addition to contributing supplies, organizations from banks to grocery store chains are shifting business practices to meet the needs of customers and consumers during this time:

U.S. banks (Ally Bank, Citi, Goldman Sachs) are waiving fees and interest on loans and overdrafts. Barclaycard is stopping late payment and cash advance fees for the next 90 days. UK banks (Nationwide and Barclays) offer early opening hours for people aged 70 and over and those with underlying health conditions.

Supermarkets (Waitrose, Sainsbury's, Tesco, Iceland, Lidl) are opening early, allocating the first two hours of business – post deep-clean and with fully stocked supplies – to priority shopping for elderly, vulnerable individuals and their caregivers.

Charitable efforts from companies like Chase, which donated $50 million to non-profits to address immediate public health needs, Pret-a-Manger, which is offering free coffees and 50 percent off food for National Health Service (NHS) workers, showcase how the private sector is driving leadership for a better world.

Tech companies have also committed to global causes in creative and interesting ways:

Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and TikTok have pledged to remove coronavirus conspiracy theories.

Pharmaceutical companies (including Novartis, Bayer, Teva and Mylan) have pledged nearly 220 million chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine tablets for the global COVID-19 response.

ByteDance is offering free use of its online workspace app for three years for NGOs, hospitals and medical institutions in China.

Baidu created a map layer showing real-time locations of confirmed cases of the virus to better inform travellers in China.

LinkedIn is offering 16 of its online learning courses for free, including sessions on staying productive, building relationships when you’re not face to face, using virtual meeting tools and balancing family and work dynamics.

Pfizer’s Chief Medical Officer is sharing facts and personal tips on short social media videos to deal with COVID-19 (#KnowtheFacts) on twitter.

Amazon announced unlimited paid sick leave over the next month for those who test positive for COVID-19.

JD.com and Alibaba launched a talent-sharing platform for those in affected sectors to find work in flexible job openings in e-commerce and supermarkets.

Share your Examples

Certainly, this is not an exhaustive list, and, as the situation unfolds across the world, we’ll see more examples of ingenuity and leadership. We want to continue to shine a light on leadership for a better world and invite you to join us. Please comment or reach out to us with the stories you’ve seen. Let’s keep the positive conversation going.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Disruption

COVID-19

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top