Houston HR Leaders Look Ahead At Implications Of The Covid-19 Crisis - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Human ResourcesHouston HR Leaders Look Ahead At Implications Of The Covid-19 Crisis

May 2020

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

On Thursday, April 23rd, Egon Zehnder’s Houston office hosted 25 senior HR leaders to reflect on the current state of their businesses amidst the COVID-19 pandemic and to share ideas with each other on how they are planning for the future. The following themes resonated the most:

The “How” And The “Why” Of Reopening

Everything is being reconsidered. “We say we want to go back to the office. However, what we valued in the past about being in the office was the social interaction; one-onone meetings and catching up over coffee with someone,” said one executive. ”Given the need for continued social distancing, many of these in-person interactions will have to be curtailed. So, we need to think carefully about the rationale for bringing people back into office and balance that with the complexity, concerns, and trade-offs of doing so.”

Most organizations are considering a phased approach, prioritizing which roles benefit most from in-person engagement. One executive is planning to bring back only 20% of headquarters employees to start.

Working from home at scale has been more seamless than many expected. This has led companies to consider prioritizing whom to bring back to the office in the near term, and whether more flexible or remote working arrangements become the norm for some roles permanently.

“Our executive team was historically quite traditional and had a hard time getting on board with telecommuting,” said one executive. “Now they realize employees can be quite efficient while working from home.”

“Remote working supported by technology has been successful, especially for transactional activities,” said another executive. ”But the jury is still out on whether it will really work full-time. For certain jobs and types of decisions, especially those that might be complex, strategic, and/or emotionally loaded, in-person engagement will still be critical to effectiveness. There are also questions about the sustainability of a remote workforce over the longer term, and the impact on culture and cohesion.”

Companies Are Fundamentally Rethinking Work Practices And Business Models

“The dynamic changes required to manage the current crisis has opened the aperture to question other work processes in a way we wouldn’t have before,” one executive said.

Said another: “We held our annual sales kickoff and conference in short bursts, over multiple days vs. typical full three day/night extravaganza in Las Vegas. The approach generated significant support, and may make us reconsider similar events in the future.”

Another, in the construction sector, recognized what this would mean for their business, “We are evaluating the likely future of commercial real estate,” the executive said. “If companies will ultimately occupy less office space, fewer new buildings will be built and that impacts how we think about our construction business in the future.”

Said another who leads a retail organization: “We are reorganizing our sales structure and considering how we compensate store leaders, looking heavily at digital and e-commerce initiatives, marketing and advertising changes, and realizing we need more digitally savvy leaders across the organization.”

Human Resources Executives Are In The Spotlight

Employee health and safety is front and center. Said one leader, “In the pie chart of executive team focus, historically energy was split between strategy and performance. Now people topics carry equal weight and time in daily and weekly meetings and are seen as more interrelated to other decisions.”

The crisis has unearthed new skills and competencies required of leaders, informing potential training and development needs.

“Managing a remote workforce is now a critical skill and has required a mindset change for some leaders on what a productive day looks like,” one attendee commented. “Managers can no longer view their day as a series of meetings. They must be thoughtful about different ways to engage wit, and develop their teams.”

“During crises, like this pandemic, you often see the best and the worst in people. We’ve asked ourselves, is there an adversity quotient we should be looking for in our future executives?”

Incentive compensation is under review.

“It is important to stay the course and deliver some level of short term incentive, even if it is not to the level expected for the year.” Said one executive. “We need to be able to motivate our workforce.”

“We are considering creating new, even shorter term incentives,” said another. “We are asking ourselves, ‘what would a good May look like?’ ‘a good Q3?’ and thinking about designing incentives on a quarterly, rather than annual scheme.”

“In an industry that has a tough time attracting talent, we are also trying to keep in mind the long term, not letting go of, or losing the entry level talent that will be critical for the future.”

Silver Linings

Despite an increase in virtual interactions, there are pockets of improved connectedness. “Our senior leadership teams are interacting more frequently than ever before,” one executive said. “This has deepened relationships and created more personal connections within the leadership team. Our Friday touch point is a happy hour-like event where we decompress together from the week. There is a desire to capture and continue that connectedness going forward.”

Managing through the crisis has cemented key tenets like collaboration and teaming –across geographies and business units. “No one person or team can make the right call around COVID-19, work from home or even our response to volatile oil prices,” said one executive. “We are forced to collaborate more substantially than we ever have before and are putting protocols around how we share information and make decisions in order to formalize new standards.”

The crisis has revealed some unexpected new leaders. “The COVID-19 response has uncovered some bright rising stars from operations who have stepped up from being local leaders, to truly showing the ability to be enterprise thinkers and leaders,” said one executive. “We’ve leaned into these leaders, leveraging their insights, getting them involved in planning and response teams.”

Relative to our last virtual discussion in late March, the focus for HR leaders has clearly shifted to the longer term. We are hopeful to see some of the innovative approaches necessitated by the dynamism of the current environment turn into lasting positive changes for employees and organizations.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Human Resources

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top