Defining the Role of the Senior Independent Director (SID) on Boards - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesDefining the Role of the Senior Independent Director (SID) on Boards

At the Winter 2020 London Senior Independent Directors Dinner Series, we gathered 14 senior independent directors to discuss the role and its related challenges.

March 2020

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Defining the Role of the SID

In general, it was agreed that the SID is an artful role. It is a fine balance, where “you have influence but not prominence.” It is a listening role, where one must express empathy and is best conducted with humor. It is also an unusual role where “one can run along for years and nothing happens, then suddenly, it is all go!”

Sequencing and Proper Succession Planning

Some SIDs exhibit “naked ambition” for the chair role. Another challenge is when the chair does not want to step down. Equally, “it is very uncomfortable when you, as the SID, get a call from the shareholders wishing to exit the chair.” Normally, the SID can be “the catalyst for the chair going provided they are not a candidate.”

Therefore separation and clarity is critical. “Should the SID on appointment, rule themselves out of the chair process? Or if they do aspire to be chair, should they be compelled to declare it from the off?” Some of the group agreed this could be helpful, others questioned this notion. “I worry about too much definition. In some cases, particularly where the company is in crisis, the SID might be the best person to assume the chair role.” Therefore, each situation needs to be taken on its own merits, but it is helpful to plan chair and SID succession, particularly if the chair and the SID have joined the board at a similar time. The search consultant can help in this discussion by teasing out what is really going on and then helping the board to manage this. “It was particularly difficult to run the CEO succession without the SID.” However, it is not the chair’s role to find his or her successor.

The Nine-Year Rule

The nine-year rule has implications, in particular, around whether it makes sense for the SID to pursue the chair role from a timing perspective. On balance, attendees agreed it is a positive change.

How Can the SID Ensure He or She Is Successful?

It is difficult for a SID to be successful when either the SID does not understand the purpose of the role or when he or she does not have prior PLC experience. It can be highly pressured, and is increasingly in the public eye, “if something goes wrong, everyone looks to us.” Yet often the issues at stake are highly confidential, so it can be lonely. Therefore it is important to have resilience.

It is important to understand the “nuances of the UK market and also to recognize that there are not many materials or teachings on how to conduct the role effectively.”

We [the SIDs] are the unsung heroes/ heroines.

It is essential that the SID leads the review of chair. Two board meetings a year should occur without the chair to create a safe space for the other NEDs to review the chair and compile constructive feedback. “Whether you are the SID or the Chair, it is essential to build relationships across the business, in particular with the appropriate compliance teams. This makes it much easier to act when something goes wrong.” Overall, it is about good judgement: “We don’t have rules, we have a code. In general, if we vary from the code, we are doing it for a logical reason. Call on comply or explain!”

A long-term crisis situation is different. In this situation, significant change can be required across both the board and executive team. It is important to strike a balance between the “muscular SID” versus “the SID in name only.” Often, we are at extreme ends of the spectrum on this issue.

The Governance Code and the Role of Proxies

There was a discussion as to whether the code actually leads to better performance. In general, attendees agreed that when the code is breached, things go wrong. It can be disruptive following the proxies unless they are prepared to engage with the board, especially with remuneration. “An ISS vote against, knocks 10 points off the vote. ISS normally only gives you 48 hours to reply, even if the facts are not straight, so this is another dimension that needs to be managed.” Employee Engagement, Culture & Board Responsibility

ESG (including employee engagement) is a growing area that the SID should engage with and have a point of view on. Importance of Supporting the Chair

“NEDs are human beings and the board is a team.” Rather than focusing on the possible problems, and the things that can go wrong, it is critical to support the chair when you are a SID. The SID can help the chair by facilitating one-on-one feedback sessions with the NEDs. Sometimes the role of the SID “is to build the chair’s confidence.”

Conclusion

It is essential to be “prepared to speak truth unto power. We were concerned by our chair’s health. That is a difficult conversation to have.” The role can be “deeply uncomfortable or very benign.” Perhaps being a SID is not about being a leader, because it is more important to be supportive in this role. Finally, attendees agreed, “it is woefully underpaid.”

Topics Related to this Article

Board

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top