Solidarity is More Contagious Than the Virus - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

CEO SearchSolidarity is More Contagious Than the Virus

April 2020

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

On 27 March 2020, Egon Zehnder hosted a virtual meeting for twenty CEOs of some of the UK and Europe’s largest companies, representing aggregate revenues of £441 billion. The intent was to create a platform for business leaders to share their challenges, concerns, insights and actions related to the COVID-19 crisis. To frame the discussion, the following issues were raised:

What are the most worrisome challenges that you are currently facing?

What are you doing to address those challenges? What is working and what’s not?

How can businesses ensure a safe and swift exit from the crisis?

Looking after our teams

The immediate concern first mentioned by the participants was the safety of the frontline staff. At risk of being exposed to the virus, the employees on the front lines are society’s new heroes. The question on everybody’s mind was how they could ensure their safety and celebrate their contributions throughout the crisis.

The group reflected that this crisis is here to stay and that “actions speak louder than words.” Small gestures of appreciation for onsite staff have included free meals, videos from the leadership teams, cash rewards, or even full page newspaper advertisement saying “thank you”, which have gone a long way to keep spirits up.

Participants also discussed a range of measures they had put in place on top of the appropriate hygiene protocols, including hiring occupational health consultants, holding daily briefings with medical staff or frequent communications from the executives through virtual ‘town hall’ meetings. Looking ahead, CEOs concurred that the current imbalance of exposure between shop floor staff and those at home needed to be addressed. Participants agreed that there was no easy fix, but some evoked the possibility of rotating staff periodically; others suggested that emphasising that “we all have a part to play” had proven to be a morale booster with all employees.

Reconnecting with one’s purpose

A number of participants pointed out that the crisis represented an opportunity to reinforce the organisation’s purpose and to align deeper personal motives with that of their communities. For example, reorienting the purpose of a retailer to ‘Keep the UK fed’; or ‘keeping the UK connected’ for a telephone company were powerful statements and strong vectors of employee commitment.

The crisis allows business leaders to show their humanity and businesses to play a crucial role in supporting staff, local communities and other key stakeholders. Companies across the world are redistributing their resources (staff, assets) to support government efforts and society. Looking to the future, these acts, if sustained, will embed the cooperation deeper into the community.

Preparing for the recovery

It is widely acknowledged that crisis management can be all encompassing and that, as a result, ensuring that the team keep a focus on recovery becomes essential. At the same time there was a strong sense that companies cannot afford to forget the future. In order to ensure such balance, some have formed separate teams focused on the longer term. Initiatives discussed in the call included the redeployment and repurposing of employees whose “day jobs” had effectively disappeared, or looking at future opportunities.

Collaboration over competition

Businesses once in fierce competition may need to come together, break down barriers and collaborate to find common ground to fight the pandemic.

One example of a traditionally intensely competitive industry turning towards collaboration is supermarkets. Indeed, they are now working together with the government to create a database of the elderly and vulnerable, with a view to prioritising all deliveries of food supplies to that community.

In a situation such as this one where many want to help, the participants discussed how individual efforts could be coordinated to ensure efficient distribution of resources. Tapping into trade associations and unions to act as a centralised function was an interesting idea.

This approach could become ever more pervasive and will undoubtedly change the future of business and society. The group’s overwhelming sentiment was summed up by one CEO: “solidarity will be more contagious than the virus”.

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Leadership

Disruption

COVID-19

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top