Planning for an unknown future - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Financial ServicesCOVID-19: Planning for an Unknown Future

Third digital gathering with CEOs from the banking world, hosted by Egon Zehnder’s Financial Services Practice

April 2020

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

As COVID-19 continues to massively impact banks worldwide, leaders’ thoughts are turning to what will happen after the crisis and how banks can already prepare for it, as banking CEOs and CHROs revealed to Egon Zehnder. The problem is that there are no reference points showing us the best way forward. As one French female banking executive put it, “We’re in unchartered territory at the moment. Nobody has been through this before.” In the words of another female banking leader, “We’re changing the tyres as we’re going.”

The big question is how long the situation will last. The biggest challenge, meanwhile, is shifting mindsets: banks need to realize that this isn’t a temporary hiatus but a situation that could last for a significant amount of time, according to the head of HR at a global insurance company. “Some companies are living in the dark ages. I feel alone, like Kate Winslet standing at the front of the Titanic shouting ‘There’s an iceberg!’ and everyone’s ignoring me.”

The worst is yet to come, predicts one Irish bank’s leading executive, although Ireland is already suffering a 25% reduction in GDP. “We’re going to have to be very nimble as I don’t think we’ve had the full impact yet in Ireland.”

On a practical level, Jean-Pierre Mustier, Group Chief Executive Officer of UniCredit in Italy, is already considering solutions such as additional social distancing measures, revised layout of branches and staggered opening hours, after the lockdown. The bank will actively encourage its customers to keep using remote and digital services wherever possible as “moving from where we are today to a “new normal” is going to be challenging – we are hard at work to define how to do that.”

UK banking executives also conceded that they’re switching to “trying to think forward” mode. They see two key concerns for the future: firstly, how to manage the expectations of consumers and small businesses currently demanding funds to bail them out while not yet realizing that this isn’t free money, but a debt they’ll have to repay. The second problem is how this debt can be repaid, as “you’re just creating a bigger bubble as you exit out of this.”

A new reality

There is general recognition among CEOs that the banking world will change permanently in terms of how banks communicate with their customers and in view of the normalization of remote working for office staff. For now, however, containment while working from home is clearly dampening employee morale. “Longer lasting confinement could easily start to wear people down, so it’s key to create and maintain positive, deliberate and frequent interaction to keep up morale,” points out Mustier.

To boost mental, physical and financial health, one Irish bank has introduced a well-being app, available on all employees’ mobile devices.

Onur Genç, CEO of Spanish multinational financial services company BBVA, spoke of the need to communicate consistently and repeatedly with his employees. Management has set up so-called “war rooms”, which meet twice daily and reiterate the bank’s top two priorities, namely health and safety, and secondly the continuity of its operations. “We provide an essential service for clients out there. We have to ensure that our bank continues to run.”

In addition, BBVA has set up global and national task forces to coordinate the bank’s response, looking at how to communicate with customers and help them meet their financial needs. Moreover, senior executives meet daily to monitor risks and discuss liquidity and cash flow.

Under the motto “anticipate the worst and then plan for it,” Genç says he’s managing the crisis like a business – “you need KPIs and numbers” – and otherwise focusing on keeping communication calm, positive and frequent.

Sadly, customer aggression towards staff in branches is rising, with more banks introducing armed security guards, while stress levels among call center operatives is high.

One bank has just reached an agreement with its unions regarding its plan to offer voluntary early retirement to 5,500 employees in Italy. At the same time it will be hiring 2,500 younger people and offering them perks such as life insurance. In a country where 25% of businesses are expected to permanently close, this is a welcome positive note for the future.

To read more about UniCredit’s activities, please visit: https://one.unicreditgroup.eu/

Egon Zehnder is the world’s preeminent leadership consulting firm, sharing one goal: to help people and organizations transform. Our services include: Leadership development, individual, team and organizational effectiveness, CEO search and succession, executive search and assessment, Board advisory, and cultural transformation.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Leadership

Disruption

Finance

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top