Rethinking Businesses - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

CEO SearchMiddle Eastern CEOs Rethink Their Businesses

Virtual gathering with CEOs from various industry sectors in the Middle East, hosted by Egon Zehnder’s Dubai office

April 2020

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Leadership skills are in heavy demand in the Middle East amid the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, regional CEOs told Egon Zehnder in a recent call. “This is a wake-up call for real leadership,” summarizes one CEO. Now is an opportunity for leaders to grow closer to their people and offer reassurance. “We need to adapt and manage uncertainty in a world where everything changes and what was true yesterday is no longer true today,” says one senior executive.

CEOs’ first priority is to ensure employee and customer safety. One CEO has decided to delegate so that measures can be quickly introduced “without having to align with 200 people for something to be executed”.

The second priority is how to deal with staff costs and strike a balance between guaranteeing an organization’s future and considering its shareholders, adds one leader. This is especially pertinent in a region where the state only exceptionally steps in to pay employees and “share our pain”.

Cash is still king

All CEOs repeated one clear message, namely that “cash is king”. For one hospitality group CEO, this has meant letting go of half of his employees. “It’s a tough decision but we can’t maintain the workforce for 18-36 months before we see a recovery.” The group is focusing on securing cash flow and managing potential losses.

Retail SMEs have been badly hit, with forecasts predicting 40-50% people will be wiped out in the next three to four months. One retail CEO says they are categorizing people as either critical or non-critical “so we don’t let go of top talent”. In business terms, he has decided “to let go of unprofitable business – it’s the natural way of things”. Certain retail categories such as “home” are still operating at 50% of normal business levels online, as people are motivated to carry out “do-it-yourself” while at home. However, there is no demand for other categories, including fashion, “it’s discretionary and people don’t want to think about it”. He predicts it will take at least 12 months before the fashion sector recovers.

Positive shock

For some sectors, the corona crisis has come as a “positive shock”. One CEO has experienced a surge in online grocery orders and increased traffic in stores. “Customers rushed to super- and hypermarkets to stock up. This is especially true for a region that has witnessed war as people worried they couldn’t buy enough food for their families. We couldn’t keep up with demand with staff restocking shelves twelve times a day and shoppers sometimes buying stock even before it hit the shelves.”

At the same time, his employees are feeling a renewed sense of purpose as front-line workers, helping providing the community with daily necessities. “As a leader, I went to the front line, wearing gloves and a mask to let our front-liners know that they’re serving the community and that the government won’t forget this moment.”

Banks feel the pinch

The region’s banks, however, have been suffering. “As everyone has said, cash is king and we had a liquidity crisis at the end of March, with banks struggling to fund themselves,” says the CEO of one Dubai-based bank. An injection of liquidity from the Central Bank and a liquidity restructuring guarantee scheme proved to be a lifeline, although it remains unclear how precisely the liquidity scheme will work.

In addition, the CEO admits to a “mismatch between clients’ expectations and what we’re actually allowed to deliver”. Dubai was already facing a challenging economic situation prior to COVID-19 so it’s difficult to assess which companies were already struggling beforehand to comply with Central Bank guidelines to focus on otherwise healthy companies.

What does the future hold?

As for the future, CEOs are undecided when business will return to normal. One predicts that consumption will return to normal levels once a vaccine or cure has been developed, adding, “We need to think optimistically because otherwise, with all of this gloomy news, we’ll make worse decisions.”

For some sectors and in the most pessimistic scenario, it may take up to 36 months to recover. A services sector CEO says “For next year, I’m looking at about half my volume. The question is, are we able to build our business to be profitable at half the volume?” The expectation is a 12-13% drop in overall GDP, similar to after the two World Wars. “The morale of the workforce is important as it’s going to be a long run.”

Clearly now is the time to restructure, as the CEOs rethink their businesses. “We need to think about which businesses will continue, which will change completely and what we need to change to be equipped for the future,” concludes one participating CEO.

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

Finance

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top