Three Essential Leadership Ingredients for the Sports Industry Today and in the Future - Ty Gold - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Media & EntertainmentThree Essential Leadership Ingredients for the Sports Industry Today and in the Future

We depend on strong leadership in times of crisis. Indeed, the current situation underscores the importance of clear strategies and certain key questions for the sports industry as a whole.

April 2020

2 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

We depend on strong leadership in times of crisis. Indeed, the current situation underscores the importance of clear strategies and certain key questions for our sports clients:

Which types of leadership profiles must we demand in the sports industry?

Is entertainment the main priority? A sense of diversion from reality?

Should the industry focus on connecting its fans?

Are sports a vehicle for public health education (physical and mental) and social responsibility?

Tellingly, these questions are equally suited both to today’s relatively unprecedented environment and to periods that offer more stability.

Three core principles that have guided our approach to leadership advisory have surfaced in the sports industry to an even greater extent in recent weeks:

1. Make Diversity a Priority

Sports have a singular ability to connect different demographics. The rapidly spreading health crisis has – headlines notwithstanding – been an equalizer that affects us all. Similarly, communities of fans reflect a diverse group that is both unified and varied in its socioeconomic status, race, gender, age, disability, religion, and otherwise. Leaders and organizations must reflect their customers or they will find themselves out of touch and at a competitive disadvantage in the long term.

2. Push Ahead on Globalization

We need to accelerate the pace of globalization and reward leaders who bring this perspective. The speed with which COVID-19 has travelled the globe has given rise to shared experiences, international compassion, and timely responses. The sports industry has helped consumers cope with an unimaginably challenging situation: for example, fans of the NBA in France remain entertained by classic NBA games on digital platforms while Australians living abroad get their fix of Aussie tennis on Tennis Australia's YouTube channel.

Let’s use this time to further these trends, engender international connections, and focus on leaders with global scope to navigate the years ahead.

3. Non-Insular Backgrounds are Essential

Myopic thinking helps no one. Best-in-class organizations – in sports or otherwise – must, as Bob Iger recently noted, "innovate or die". This can be accomplished only through a fertile environment for exploration and leaders who come from both inside and more importantly outside the sports industry. The examples and rationales are endless: product/technology experts who understand how to engage consumers across the globe can develop SDKs that enhance and accelerate the transition to live event streaming; CEOs and GMs of high-performing operating businesses can – irrespective of industry – bring discipline, strategic acumen, and accountability that professional sports organizations yearn for every day.

These key ingredients should be prevalent among the leaders within the sports industry now and will position its organizations to bring joy to fans today and in the future.

Lasting Greatness

Claudio Fernández-Aráoz discovers astonishingly modern views on developing leadership potential in the works of Ignatius of Loyola.

Read more

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Disruption

Inclusion

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top