Now What? China-based CEOs on What Reopening Really Means - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

CEO SearchNow What? China-based CEOs on What Reopening Really Means

April 2020

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

On April 2, Egon Zehnder virtually convened seven chief executives of Chinese subsidiaries of global multinationals. All of them are in the process of restarting their businesses, months after COVID-19 caused the country to shut entirely. What they are learning in real time is simultaneously sobering, hopeful, and above all, useful for other executives who are further behind on the timeline. Still, executives caution that their experience may not work everywhere.

Says one CEO: “I keep cautioning the world that you cannot just cut and paste China.”

What is the New Normal?

Even as companies begin to reopen their stores and plants, leaders admit that they have no idea just how different the demand changes and consumer patterns will be—not to mention whether there will be more than one wave of disease. “Consumer behaviors are changing,” declared one CEO of a restaurant company who has reopened nearly all of its locations. Another, who runs the China arm of a Western clothing retailer, said that only 10% of its stores are on the same trajectory they were previously—and the rest have varying levels of dropoff in demand. “The learning ahead for us is ‘just how many more stages are there?’ We’re trying to see some consistent patterns,” she said.

What is clear is that the way consumers buy—in person vs. online; what they value in an uncertain environment—is changing for the near term if not forever, and companies will need to be more flexible and responsive than they’ve ever been. Said one industrial products CEO: “The biggest challenge I see with the epidemic is that we are negotiating unknowns. My boss asked me for guidance. I said ‘I really don’t know.’”

Expect More Supply Chain Disruption

The global nature of the supply chain means that even though restrictions are easing within China, the lockdown elsewhere makes the disruptions continue. Said one chemical producer CEO: “Everyone else is closing borders, so we are not getting intermediate products.” Said another head of the Chinese unit of an industrial company: “For China, crisis management is largely over, but for the rest of APAC, we are still in phase one. The biggest challenge is the supply chain and logistics. How do we direct to the Chinese supply chain?” Others wonder whether the retreat to national borders may make move away from the China-centric supply chain a permanent one.

Lasting Greatness

Claudio Fernández-Aráoz discovers astonishingly modern views on developing leadership potential in the works of Ignatius of Loyola.

Read more

Focus on Calm, Purpose and Teamwork

As the crisis drags on, all of the leaders agreed on the importance of maintaining both calm and focus. In a normal time, those attributes are important. In a time like this one— especially as the adrenaline wears off—what leaders do and say is being looked to as a symbol more than ever before. “The only thing you can do is control how you respond,” says the leader of a large consumer products company in China. “This, too shall pass. The second thing is the leadership shadow we create. I want to worry about real things, like safety, and how to help people in our communities. Not just to appear calm, but to be calm. In my case, it’s really about positivity and optimism.”

That can only happen, one executive cautioned, by realizing that there’s no way that one leader can do everything on their own. “It’s about leading as a collective,” he said. “You gain a lot by having a real team of 30-50 people. No one person can manage this.” And the team needs to hear it more than you think, another executive said. “We have much more time together as a leadership team since we don’t travel as much. And we say thank you more. Appreciation is important.”

Reevaluate Talent

Other leaders noted that one positive byproduct of the crisis has been the natural emergence of some leaders—many of whom weren’t necessarily thought of as rising stars beforehand. “You see people in the team actually step up,” says the head of a chemical company’s China division. “Those are the leaders. You don’t tell them [what to do]; they just step out and get things done.” He said he is now including these leaders in new crossfunctional teams that are looking at new ways to work in the post COVID-19 era.

Be Ready to Act

As the emergency period comes to an end. Leaders of China-based businesses are increasingly focused on the future and what kinds of moves they can make to extend or gain advantage. “What is more important is to come out stronger,” one CEO of a consumer products company said. “We have to make this an opportunity to be a stronger business. How can we get more competitive, increase share, pivot more quickly and move money?” Another head of a global restaurant company said it is now time to focus on offense rather than defense. “We are asking for capital expenditures because we see opportunities,” she said. We want to accelerate restaurant openings, and we want to know when we are making an attack whether we have sufficient bullets at the back end.”

Topics Related to this Article

COVID-19

CEO

Disruption

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top