Learning from Each Other During the COVID-19 Pandemic - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Transformational Development ProgramsLearning from Each Other During the COVID-19 Pandemic

Insights from CEOs of India’s largest manufacturing companies

March 2020

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Leaders from six major industrial and manufacturing companies and groups operating in India gathered on a video call on March 13 to share how they were handling the crisis now, and how they were planning for what is to come. Most of these companies have operations in India and overseas; and together have over 130 factories and 120,000 employees.

Here is what we learned.

This is first and foremost a humanitarian crisis.

There was a clear sense that we were beyond this being a business crisis. The need for empathy was a key theme, and everyone echoed that business must reach to every employee we have; not just in our
workplaces but also in our homes.

Care is a key quality to hold on to and reflect on in these times. Not just for employees, who are looking for clear guidance and direction, but also for ourselves.This is a crisis unlike one seen before and is a new challenge for everyone.

This is going to get much worse before it gets better.

Everyone agreed that we are in a very tough period, which will last for the next 3-6 months at least. It is going to get much worse. The impact of this multiplied across the economy will be felt not just on organizations, but on those that partner with companies as employees, vendors, customers and on their families. To prevent an even more significant humanitarian crisis down the line, one has to focus on the business today and act decisively.

Travel cancellations, remote work, focus on personal hygiene are the norm.

All the companies agreed that they have started doing the basics: cancelling travel and gatherings, introducing health checks in the plants and offices, making sanitizers available everywhere, practicing social distancing, and evaluating and implementing working remotely where possible.
Most companies have put in place protocols for working from home, protocol on how to respond to a infection on their premises and more.

Companies are experimenting, making mistakes, and learning fast. Here are some ideas on how to manage that everyone should consider.

In a crisis, with things changing fast, it’s important to give “local” leaders – those in plants, in branches, or in overseas offices, the empowerment to make decisions as they feel appropriate within certain guidelines. It is not only difficult but also not effective for the CEO or her leadership team to personally direct responses across the organization.

Listening deeply to employees through multiple channels is very important. Being heard and responded to helps manage anxiety. One company has a daily call with all “local leaders” in the organization. What started as a way to discuss actions to be taken has become a great forum to understand employee’s anxiety across the organization and address them with clear, frequent, and transparent communication. Another company has a 24/7 helpline to “listen” to employees and provide appropriate social, managerial, or psychological counselling.

While several organizations are focusing on business process continuity, few have paid attention to continuity of executive leadership. One company has identified “stand in” successors for the top 25 roles in the company in the event of any individual being incapacitated. The successors have been told and briefed on the actions expected of them.

Isolating plants to ensure production continuity is critical. One company given instructions that no one external to the plant (from another plant, from HQ, or an external) would be allowed in. When statutory provisions meant that auditors had to enter the plant, they were requested to self-certify that they had not travelled internationally recently; and also get a clean bill of health.

Another organization has analyzed the geographic footprint of its employees by department and made decisions that support both employee productivity and employee health. e.g., they realized their finance department had several people based in one particular Mumbai suburb. They quickly set up a satellite office and gave the finance team an option to work together, from an office close to home, so they would not need to travel on public transport, but also would be protected from exposure to a larger number of people in headquarters.

The silver lining: The crisis has created opportunities to both grow and to strengthen the business.

Despite the challenges, the absence of travel means leaders have more time that they ever had before. There was resonance that this time should be directed towards “stepping-back” and looking structurally and strategically at the business.

With many organizations around the world getting impacted by supply chain challenges linked to China, companies are seeing the opportunity to position India as a meaningful second supply base, both internally and with customers. This has already begun to happen opportunistically, with some companies have been getting inquiries from customers in geographies they have previously not focused on.

The crisis has exposed significant vulnerabilities in their own supply chains, exposing concentration risk and providing opportunities to even further localize at lower costs.

Several organizations are recognizing the value of multi-skilling employees in their plants. With many plants having specialized workers reducing those that have to come in to work has been a challenge.

One organization shared how they have always wanted to find a new technology-first way to address sales and distribution, particularly in Tier 3 and 4 towns but had not been able to do so. The crisis was now pushing them towards piloting these “remote” solutions quickly.

There is a call for business to co-operate to help each other; and to help the community.

Everyone is dealing with a challenge that’s not been seen before. Instead of everyone making the same mistakes, there is a case for companies to learn from each other and manage this a little better, or a little faster.
There is a strong belief that this is a challenge that will require the public and private sector to work together. Could there be a role for companies to come together in the communities they are a part of and brainstorm how they can collectively buttress the government response?

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Industrial

COVID-19

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top