Executive Mobility is not Dead - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Executive SearchExecutive Mobility is not Dead

Egon Zehnder's Lindsay Trout discusses what's next for executives

April 2020

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Naturally, I get this question: “What does this crisis mean for executive recruitment? Won’t execs all be hunkering down?” Honestly, I think the exec ranks will be as “dynamic” as everything else is right now. A few hypotheses:

Burnout

So many executives are working extended and extra-stressful hours. They are reviewing new alternative strategies with their board, scenario planning (again and again) with their CFO, and perhaps preparing for layoffs and re-editing associated employee communications. On top of this, they are also negotiating with banks, investors and creditors.

Adding to their stress is the fact that their spouses are agitated that even though they are physically present, they’re not available to hold up their end of the partnership. There is added pressure now, especially given that the kids, meals, work and entertainment are now all at home.

A sense of commitment to the team and the mission carries one through as a leader. But once they ensure that their team and the stakeholders are stable, won’t they need a break?

Empty Equity

For many executives, equity is a meaningful component of compensation. Therefore, it serves as a compelling reason why people stay at a company. Equity is well designed when it incentivizes leaders to create value over multiple years.

However, given the impact of the COVID-19 crisis and an uncertain outlook for the future, a lot of equity grants are no longer valuable. So, some executives may ask, “why stay?” They will not realize the expected upside of their equity. Instead, the next two years will be another slog, with an unclear likelihood of great return.

Several real-life examples illustrate this phenomenon. One executive said she “feels like she’s working for free.” Another stated that her contracted severance was actually more valuable than the payout of her current comp package. A third led the charge for his C-suite to take an additional 10 percent in total compensation reduction compared to the reductions for the VP ranks.

You No Longer Fit

Executives are typically appointed to their particular position because they fit the context. As an example, you might be highly commercial and able to drive a growth strategy, have extensive international experience and able to expand into new markets or be well versed in acquisitions and able to consolidate the industry. Well, you may no longer fit the specs the company needs. The board may have hired you for a certain spec and now may need something new. Perhaps they might need to shift from a peacetime leader to a wartime leader. The playbook changed, so the coach may need to change the team to accommodate it.

Your Job is Less Fulfilling

There may be aspects of your job that exist no longer. If, as a sales executive, you loved jetting across the country, meeting people, and wining and dining before traveling to a boondoggle to celebrate “club” accomplishments, you may be feeling a bit dismayed at this jarring change. If, as a marketeer, you loved engaging customers to buy and shop, activating them with compelling messaging about fashion and style, you may be bored and bewildered. If, as a CHRO, you loved building teams and setting up the infrastructure to help a budding business scale, you are likely disappointed at what’s on your to-do list today.

Yes, the job requirements, the expectations and the mechanisms by which to deliver on your remit have all changed. In some cases, these changes have been quite dramatic. There is a question of whether things will ever return to the way they were or if a new “normal” will emerge. It may be time to reflect deeply on your sources of energy and try to repurpose for the current situation. Doing so also can help set you up to better tackle the future.

So, will there be need for executive recruitment over this horizon? Yes. The catalysts have changed but leaders may need a break, lack financial motivation to stay in their current role, or be incongruent with their redefined roles, as discovered by their board/boss or themselves.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

COVID-19

Disruption

Talent Management

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top