Adjusting the Dials: What Matters Most for CEOs is Evolving - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Adjusting the Dials: What Matters Most for CEOs is Evolving

October 2025

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

I think that if we want to accelerate and be ready for a new and best world for all generations to come, we have to put our hands together now with all of society, no matter if you are part of a public or private organization.

CEO respondent

What is on the minds of today’s CEOs?  We asked, and over 1,200 CEOs across the globe responded.  There are many insights in our new report—The CEO Response 2025—but one stands out: Today’s chief executives refuse to be paralyzed by the global challenges they are confronting. Instead, they show a staunch resolve to roll up their sleeves, accept the realities of uncertainty and geopolitical turbulence, and position themselves and their companies to grow and enhance global prosperity.

There is wide consensus among these business leaders that to meet these future ends, they must cultivate levels of adaptability beyond anything previously imagined within themselves and their teams. Years of navigating crises and constant uncertainty have taught them to lean in, move head-on into complexity and that adaptability and agility are the most critical skills to develop. As the old saying goes—if you can’t go around it, over it, or under it, you must go through it.

We believe this report unveils a pivotal moment in the evolution of leadership. CEOs are shifting from reacting to uncertainty—they are using it as a catalyst for growth, innovation, and progress. Here are some other key findings of the report:

1. Compared to just a year ago, most CEOs report feeling a lot more prepared for the complexities and challenges they foresee ahead.

While seventy-two percent of CEOs see the prospects for global prosperity declining or stagnating, most feel ready to navigate these realities and affect change —in part because the past few years have been a learning experience like no other. “We are getting accustomed to tackling frequent disruptions in business by now,” one CEO explained.

2. A striking 97% recognize possibilities for contributing to global prosperity in the future, either within or outside their organizations.

Leaders are clearly voicing both a desire and a commitment to contribute positively to today’s economy, focusing on the needs of all stakeholders. As one CEO put it: “Any effort must be made by business leaders to get us back into a better situation.”

3. Geopolitical instability stands out as the foremost challenge facing CEOs and their organizations.

Close behind, they rank economic uncertainty, market disruption, talent development, and the impact of AI as extremely pressing.

4. Agility and adaptability have emerged as the bedrock of the new leadership paradigm.

CEOs now place these qualities at the heart of their strategy, with 59% viewing them as the most important currency for building organizational resilience and securing long-term success. As a result, CEOs feel dramatically better prepared for the complexity ahead than they did last year.

5. To make sense of the numerous challenges they are facing, CEOs are relying foremost on their executive teams, and next on their CEO peers.

Just as in last year’s survey, they are finding less time to discuss these challenges with their executive boards or Chair.

6. Cultivating a culture of curiosity and open-mindedness remains the top skill CEOs point to for mastering today’s complexity.

There is clear recognition that there is no playbook to draw from. Years of rampant instability have become their school, shaping a generation of CEOs who are highly adaptable and learning as they lead.

Last year, CEOs told us they expected groundbreaking change ahead. This year they signal a clear intent to step forward and into it. The new CEO Response reveals a generation of leaders who are redefining success and setting a new standard for how organizations can thrive in these unpredictable times. They are certain that adaptability is key. The exciting question is how this adaptability is brought to life? We have some clues: forward momentum will be fueled by curiosity, openness, courage and experimentation, culture and team development and, above all, ongoing personal development. The way forward is clear, and CEOs are on the path.

Explore more of our CEO Insights editions.

Get the Insights

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

New CEO Models and Pathways

Leading in Complexity

Leadership Development

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top