Feeding it Forward: Face the Future of Personalized Nutrition - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

ConsumerFeeding it Forward: Face the Future of Personalized Nutrition

Egon Zehnder’s 2nd Annual Fresh Start Executive Forum Breakfast

July 2019

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

As food industry leaders continue to understand the power and potential of personalized nutrition, they are challenged with bringing together two very distinct and often unique skillsets required to successfully navigate this industry movement: scientiﬁc expertise and marketing prowess. It’s now more critical than ever for leaders to eﬀectively merge cultures and capabilities in new ways, accounting for the explosion of data and revolutionary research within the industry. They must also consider the human nature of their customers and competitive dichotomies that bring both regulatory and reputation challenges.

At Egon Zehnder’s second annual Fresh Start Executive Forum Breakfast in New Orleans, leaders gathered to discuss the future of personalized nutrition and the need for an interdisciplinary approach.

The breakfast was hosted by Alejandro Folmer, Consultant and AgroFood Leader and Jason Hecker, Consultant and AgroFood Leader, who also served as moderator. The distinguished panelists included:

Rachel Cheatham, Founder & CEO, Foodscape Group, LLC

Dr. Mario Ferruzzi, Professor of Food Science and Nutrition, North Carolina State University

Alan Murray, CEO, NextFoods Inc.

Several key insights on the future of personalized nutrition were shared:

Consumers are at the heart of personalized nutrition.

They are shaping the journey and how the industry approaches it, driving the need for both technology and modern science but also looking to tradition and relationships as source of truth. Whether they realize it or not, they have come to expect products backed by science and tradition and want to know that the industry leaders are working to balance the two in a transparent and simple way that is easy for them to understand. For example, consider sour dough bread, which is known to be a long-standing traditional bread that goes back thousands of years even before the discovery of yeast. Making a comeback, bread makers have modernized their recipe for today’s food standards, but also maintain the most ancient sour doughs, to integrate nostalgic flavor profiles and emotional connection.  In addition, with consumer gut health being the epicenter of research and information, as well as the emotional and human side of food itself, defining health and putting brackets around it is challenging and will continue to be challenging in the years to come.

Data is only as valuable as the partnerships and consumer behaviors behind it.

When it comes to ownership of data and information, there is complexity that will require new partnerships and approaches that consumers will trust and appreciate. It will be up to today’s leaders to establish the right teams that understand how to capture value by bringing together the right data and elements that personalize nutrition effectively. However, on the flip side, data can inform the right decisions, but in and of itself, may not change consumer behavior. Successful leaders will understand that they must look beyond the data and consider the consumer emotion behind it.

Truthful, transparent and genuine communication is needed.

Today’s leaders must consider how their companies communicate with consumers from all walks of life. They must look beyond the back label and participate in the communities that form around nutrition today. Whether an online community debating the merits of ingredients, or an entrepreneur speaking passionately about their product, conversations are happening with or without food companies. Approaching communication with an interdisciplinary team that brings together different vantage points, including scientists and marketers, will be critical. And,  as misinformation continues to be the rule rather than the exception, the right teams and expertise can bring together knowledge and communication within the right channels.

Successful leaders will understand that they must look beyond the data and consider the consumer emotion behind it.

Training and development must be approached from multiple perspectives.

There is a need for collaboration and integration of multiple disciplines, from an understanding of food technology, nutrition technology, product development, regulatory and marketing. Combined skillsets and seamless communication have not always been common in food and beverage companies, but there is opportunity for leaders today to build this talent and provide opportunity for growth and development. Don’t underestimate the patience in building this system and maintaining it as it will greatly benefit the success of the organization for years to come.

Success will require an agile culture adept at external partnership.

Investing in employees to create cross-disciplinary skills is one approach to merging capabilities, but when the breadth of expertise needed is broad, it can be difficult to know it all. Investing in a venture group focused on third party partnerships is another considerable tactic to consider. Creating these partnerships to bring together critical areas of expertise can lead to great benefits.

Facing the future of personalized nutrition starts with an open dialogue among today’s leaders addressing the challenges and opportunities within the industry. Those that bring together the right mix of competencies, communicate effectively and build a complementary culture built on both science and human nature will come out on top.

Topics Related to this Article

Disruption

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top