CHRO Voice Series: Navigating Transformation with People at the Center - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Human ResourcesNavigating Transformation with People at the Center

A Conversation with Mark Anthony Group Chief Transformation & People Officer Heather Ray

September 2025

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

There is no status quo when it comes to talent if you want a progressive, high-performing organization – it’s always and forever the top priority.

Heather Ray

Chief Transformation & People Officer of Mark Anothy Group

The role of the Chief Human Resources Officer (CHRO) and Chief People Officer (CPO) has expanded far beyond traditional HR boundaries. In some organizations, it’s evolving into a dual role, such as at Mark Anthony Group, where Chief Transformation & People Officer Heather Ray not only leads the people function but also spearheads enterprise-wide transformation, shapes strategy, and drives organizational agility. In this candid conversation, she shares her approach to building a high-impact HR function, leading transformation with speed, and preparing leaders for a future shaped by AI and organizational agility.

Given the natural overlap between HR and leading change, how do you bring together your dual roles to help people—and the business—thrive?

Building an extraordinary team around me has been game changing. I realized early on that to maximize my impact—and our team’s impact—on the organization that I needed to get the right people and structure in place. Today, I have an incredible team of transformation, HR, and communication professionals that challenge the status quo, pilot new programs, and share the same passion for delivering business success as our executives.

This foundation allows me to focus on long-term strategy with the executive team, staying ahead of external developments and preparing the organization for what’s next. Every day is different, and my HR and transformation hats are interchangeable because change leadership principles guide both functions.

From a functional HR perspective, we are disciplined about fundamentals, including coaching, development, recognition, reward, and growth opportunities. It’s not flashy, but it works. We avoid chasing trends and instead focus on what’s relevant and impactful for our business.

Talent remains at the heart of our strategy. We maintain a high bar, move fast, and continuously refine our approach. There’s no room for complacency—we’re always evaluating, developing, and investing in our people. Balancing external hires, internal promotions, and entry-level pipelines creates a dynamic environment where everyone is learning and growing.

How do you drive meaningful, organization-wide change as the lines between people, technology, and business strategy continue to blur?

Leading change requires knowing how to get things done quickly and effectively across the organization. I understand how different parts of the business connect and where interdependencies lie, which helps me align structural and human implications of change.

Take AI, for example. It was initially falling through the cracks—no clear ownership, no momentum. I stepped in to align teams, identify top use cases, launch pilots, and create executive alignment. AI is a great example of how HR can lead business-critical initiatives in partnership with technology and digital leaders.

Looking ahead, I’m excited about how AI will reshape work and require thoughtful organizational design for success in the future. The convergence of IT, business, and people functions will demand speed, agility, and a people-centric approach. Leadership will be key to keeping teams focused and in sync through change that is happening at an ever rapid rate.

How does Mark Anthony Group define transformation, and how do you operationalize it?

We define transformation as “significant, strategic change that impacts multiple functions or business units and needs to be accomplished on an accelerated basis.” To support this, we established a Transformation Office under my leadership, tightly integrated with HR and Corporate Communications.

This setup is especially important because studies show more than 70% of all transformations fail or underdeliver on their expectations—most often because the human journey of change is more challenging or is overlooked. We ensure that every transformation initiative considers the human journey—communication, training, performance, reward, and recognition. We clarify success metrics, accountability, and critical paths, and work side-by-side with teams to overcome roadblocks.

Nearly two years in, we’ve led acquisition integrations, launched new operating models, enabled systems, and driven digital and AI transformation. Our business leaders consistently recognize the transformation team’s role in accelerating outcomes and making it easier to move things forward together.

What skills do you believe are most critical for future HR leaders?

Trust and influence are non-negotiable. Understanding what motivates stakeholders and aligning with their goals leads to better outcomes. I want leaders to feel I’m fully invested in their success and the business’s success. Courage is also key, especially in identifying and addressing organizational tensions that slow us down. Time waste really frustrates me, and I’m passionate about finding faster, more aligned ways of working.

Curiosity and business acumen are vital. I see myself as a business leader first, through the lens of people. We approach HR like a business, ensuring every initiative drives meaningful impact. We challenge ourselves to ask, “So what?” and “What’s the business outcome?” to stay relevant and avoid the HR echo chamber.

Finally, the importance of communication and inspirational leadership are sometimes underestimated but they are critical. In a digital world, consistency in messaging is everything. People need to hear things multiple times to retain them. It’s not about policies; it’s about creating a mindset, inspiring people, and keeping them at the heart of our business, actively showing them that we will remain grounded in our philosophy that our People Drive Growth.

What advice would you give HR leaders as they shape their approaches to talent and culture?

Be relentlessly relevant. What worked for a 50,000-person organization won’t necessarily work for a 2,500-person entrepreneurial company like ours. During a period of rapid growth, we hired hundreds of leaders. Many wanted to replicate programs from previous companies, but we had to critically evaluate what was right for us. Staying true to our entrepreneurial culture helped simplify and clarify our people agenda.

Focus is equally important. Your team’s time is your most valuable resource. Direct it toward high-impact activities that support business strategy. Sometimes that means challenging the status quo or saying no. But if you’re driving real value, that’s what your business partners want—and need.

Lastly, remember that shaping talent and culture is not just about structure or technology but about sparking real transformation within your organization. True progress comes from building momentum and engagement that people genuinely want to be part of. That’s how you achieve lasting results.

Explore our candid conversations with HR Leaders from some of the world's most recognizable companies, sharing real challenges and impactful solutions.

Get the Insights

Topics Related to this Article

Human Resources

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Sara O’Gorman
Seattle

Sara serves as a trusted thought-partner and advisor to her clients, particularly at times of transition for executives, boards and organizations.
more

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top