Understanding the Role of the SID in Your Organization - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesLondon SID Board Dinner: Autumn 2019

How has the role of the SID evolved since its inception 16 years ago—and where is it going?

November 2019

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

We gathered thirteen SID leaders to discuss the role of the SID and how it's evolved since its inception sixteen years ago. Below are key highlights from the discussion:

When does the role come into its own?

During times of crisis and emergency

When difficult messages need to be delivered to the chair and in conveying feedback to the chair

In bringing the NEDs together

In amplifying the voice of the chair, but equally, holding the chair to account

In helping the flow of communication

In acting as the relief valve, internally and externally

The art of aligning and translating all the internal messages; the SID must be abreast of all of this

When the relationship between the CEO and Chair has broken down

The SID role is about listening, observing and facilitating outside of meetings

Are there merits to combining the SID role with the committee chair roles?

In general, the group agreed that it is not optimal to have the SID also being one of the committee chairs. On larger boards, it can be good to form a four-person quartet to enhance decision making (comprised of Chair, SID and the two committee chairs). But there are risks with this approach, with the possibility that some of the directors may feel ostracised, risking creating a quasi two-tier board system.

What are some of the challenges of the role?

It is an undervalued and underpaid role. It requires sophisticated emotional intelligence; you’ve got to know what to engage with and when. The SID role is a leadership role, but it is also a followership role. He or she must be comfortable leading from behind. Although there is often not a lot to do, the quiet times are important for building good relationships with all board members and the executive team so that the board can mobilize quickly in times of duress.

The SID role is about listening, observing and facilitating outside of meetings.

Chair succession, the process

Should the SID aspire to be chair? The group largely agreed that it is much better if the SID does not aspire to be chair. It can be very damaging if the SID does not declare an interest in the chair role, in spite of wanting it, so the SID must be transparent in these circumstances. The 9-year rule, whilst initially being disruptive, has helped with chair succession in the longer term.

During Chair succession, the SID has to determine the timing of when the chair goes. It is very important that the previous chair is excluded from the chair succession process. It is also important to involve the CEO, one meeting is not enough. In some companies, particularly larger ones, the CEO should be allowed to veto potential chair candidates Make sure from the outset who is in the process

Make sure the process is quick, the moment you launch it, it can destabilize an organization, so time is of the essence. Speed of decision making around the board table is critical, you can wait for the right candidate but very lengthy deliberation is not helpful

My bias is to involve the whole board. When everyone feels involved, decisions are easier

If the chair is not going within the accepted timescales, it is important to announce an end date and give context. Why is he or she staying on? When will they go?

The Soft Skills (and Board Effectiveness Reviews)

It is important to check in with people even if there are no obvious issues. It is easy to think, ‘I’m busy’, but it is critical to take the time to examine the nuances of a situation. What are people not telling you? We discussed how to explore what’s happening under the bonnet, particularly if there is a strong chair at the helm. Several guests agreed that using the Board Effectiveness Review (BER) Report as a starting point, is a good way to trigger this discussion. A questionnaire in a BER is generally inadequate, the real value comes from in-depth interviewing of the board directors.

People underestimate the power of engagement and picking up the phone to shareholders. But discretion is key, the outside world cannot know of any challenges, as corporate reputation is critical.

Reviewing the Chair

An important part of the SID role is to conduct the annual review of the Chair. This can occasionally be challenging, but it is important that the Chair hears all the key messages

Engaging with shareholders

The SID should be available for shareholders to speak to if they have some concerns and need a second channel. SIDS need to be proactive in reaching out to key shareholders to before there is any crisis, the onus should not necessarily be on shareholders to make contact first

What have we learned?

In general, the role has been additive and the group is happy that the role was conceived by Higgs, sixteen years ago. Regulation may bring the role to greater prominence.

Topics Related to this Article

Board

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top