To Accelerate CEO Diversity, Look to CMOs - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Marketing and SalesTo Accelerate CEO Diversity, Look to CMOs

CMOs make ideal CEO candidates for several compelling reasons – in addition to their gender diversity.

June 2019

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

History hasn’t necessarily favored the marketer when it comes to C-suite hierarchy. While talented marketing leaders are occasionally considered for internal CEO succession, external searches largely focus on other C-suite titles. As a result, not only do companies fail to fully benefit from the unique capabilities of qualified CMOs, they also miss out on a diverse pool of candidates.

The CMO role and marketing function are some of the most gender-diverse in business especially compared to the function that has most often been tapped for the CEO seat, the CFO. According to our bi-annual Global Board Diversity study, women hold only 13.6% of CFO roles in the U.S. That contributes to the even more grim CEO statistics with women holding only 4.7% of the positions. Contrast these figures with statistics from this year’s Fortune 100 where nearly 50% of CMOs on the list are women.

Clearly, the pipeline of female CEOs must be strengthened. But the good news is, businesses need to look no further than the marketing function.

More validation of CMO-to-CEO transitions

While COOs or CFOs, who typically oversee P&Ls across industries, are considered the traditional or safe choices for CEO succession and search, CMOs make ideal candidates for several compelling reasons – in addition to their gender diversity.

1. Excelling in Change Leadership

With a constant focus on people — attitudes, behaviors and what drives them — CMOs are well-equipped to handle cultural change in the CEO suite, an area where we find current CEOs often struggle.

An Egon Zehnder study comparing outstanding CMOs to those with the same distinction in COO, CHRO, CFO and CEO roles found that across factors — ranging from team leadership to change leadership — CMOs exceed their executive team members and most closely align with CEO leadership qualities.

In fact, CMOs and CEOs perform equally when it comes to change leadership.

This means, when we look at the ability to transform, align and energize an organization, CMOs and CEOs are equally effective leaders. All businesses are in the midst of transformation, so the ability of the chief executive to drive change through people and align an organization on a new direction should be a top consideration.

2. A Focus on the Customer

We are fully immersed in the customer-centric, experience economy, where considerations have shifted from broad to focused. That means marketing principles must now align with overall business strategies.

As noted in the above graph, the other competency that CMOs beat their fellow peers in the C-suite is Customer Impact. The best marketers not only meet the needs of the customer faster, they are well-versed in anticipating those needs — the very recipe for competitive edge in today’s business world. Boards who need to infuse customer experience across the entire organization should tap marketers to bring this strategy to life.

3. All about the Data

While customers are at the center of business decisions today, those decisions must be backed by data. For marketers, this is not a new approach. Marketing has always been a delicate balance of art and science with data as a core component.

In fact, modern CMOs are not just comfortable with data, they live and breathe it. CEOs who want to infuse such data mindedness across their organizations should leverage their marketing leaders who have been fighting this battle for the last decade.

As innovation becomes more critical to the business, marketers who have married data insight with strategic thinking for years are well-poised to take leadership positions where they can apply the value of their experiences.

Give marketers the P&L control they deserve

One of the challenges holding CMOs across industries from elevating to the CEO role is lack of P&L ownership.  However, we know that CMOs are certainly capable of running P&Ls, as we’ve seen in CPG companies where they’ve been harnessing great, diverse, customer-centric talent to run big P&Ls for decades.

My colleague Cynthia Soledad, who runs Egon Zehnder’s Diversity and Inclusion practice, sees a variety of consumer companies focused not only on leadership development but marry that with diversity strategies because they recognize that the buyer is a diverse population.

She says: “Having leadership teams reflect the diversity of the buyer has always been important to CPG companies, which is why marketing titles are often given more weight compared to other industries.”

I’d argue that more industries and companies should open P&L experience to marketing leaders.

The bottom line

From diversity, customer-centric and data-driven mindsets to their ability to successfully drive change, it’s evident that CMOs have all the attributes to make ideal CEO candidates…we just need to develop them for it.  And we have proof that it can work across industries, with examples of successful marketer-to-CEO transitions. Leaders like former Intuit CEO Brad Smith (marketing background with ADP, ADVO and Pepsi), Chip Bergh of Levi Strauss (former marketer at P&G) and Rodan + Fields CEO Diane Dietz (CMO at Safeway) have all risen to success largely due to the skills developed and perfected as marketers.

Changing the future for CMOs will change the future of business and positively impact the bottom line.

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Leadership

Marketing

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

This article originally appeared in Forbes. View the original article here.

This article originally appeared in Forbes. View the original article here.

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top