Handelszeitung - More and More Diversity Projects - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Inclusive LeadershipHandelszeitung - More and More Diversity Projects

Simone Stebler discusses diversity, HR-Tech and why bosses need to be more approachable.

April 2019

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

This interview appeared in Handelszeitung's April 2019 print issue and can be viewed in full here.

In an interview with HANDELSZEITUNG, Simone Stebler discusses diversity, HR-Tech and why bosses need to be more approachable.

Handelszeitung: You used to work as a trial attorney - what do you take with you from that time for your current job?
Simone Stebler: In my ten years as a lawyer, I was often involved in conflict situations. The work was a lot of fun, but today I bring people together. When I thought about the change, I thought it might be more suited to me.

H: Does this help you to better understand what is going on in people who are in a similar situation?
SS: Yes, that is so. It's not just the personal experience of changing from one industry to another. It also requires a certain adjustment of identity, especially when you take a step up the career ladder. I see parallels when I accompany managers on their way up to management. For this reason, all of our consultants have a background in a different industry and have undergone a complete career change. My colleagues have worked, for example, in science, music or marketing.

H: What are currently the most important trends in the industry?
SS: Diversity is a trend that we are observing both in Switzerland and globally. Fortunately, we have an increasing number of projects aimed at promoting diversity and inclusion, whether in recruitment or leadership development. The second trend is the use of new technologies in the HR sector. We follow this scene very closely and register what is new and exciting. There are artificial intelligence and other online solutions that work with voice recognition, for example, and create entire personality profiles accordingly. Personally, however, I believe that human judgment cannot be replaced when filling positions. These new tools can provide clues and certain puzzle pieces and help to identify people, but they don't bring people to the same table yet.

H: Are you talking about recruitment services in general or executive search?
SS: I'm thinking especially of executive search at the top level. But also in general, the desire for more closeness is a trend that to a certain extent runs counter to digitalization. In our Millennials study it became clear that the youngest generation on the labour market wants their superiors to be more approachable. Therefore, a face-to-face interview will continue to play an essential role in the interview process. More technological solutions will create a desire for greater human proximity.

H: The millennials demand not only closeness, but also strong values and visionary thinking from leaders. Does this have an impact on executive search?
SS: Yes, we realize that visionary thinking and approachability - also in the sense of personal support and development of employees - are in demand from the younger generation. At the same time, however, they also need a certain humbleness and the ability to stand by their own mistakes and weaknesses, which in turn creates closeness. This human component will become increasingly important in the future - the ability to reflect on oneself as a person and to reinvent oneself again and again will also become central for leaders. At the same time, the millennials attach much less importance to status in the sense of job titles and roles, but much value to purpose.

"The desire for greater closeness is a trend that runs counter to digitization."

Simone Stebler, Egon Zehnder

H: What other trends are you observing?
SS: Succession planning tends to be approached more long-term and prudently: We are increasingly being called in by companies to assess a talent pool consisting of internal candidates.

H: How important is diversity in your company?
SS: Very important. We now have a chairwoman and 36 percent female consultants as well as 44 percent women on the Executive Committee. We are not yet where we want to be and have set ourselves the goal of achieving a balanced gender balance by 2030.

H: What does the topic look like in day-to-day business?
SS: It's an important topic because we believe that a diverse environment is a prerequisite for innovation and motivation of employees and an inspiring working environment. I've already had some cancellations of exciting management roles for female candidates who argued that the proportion of women in the searching company was too low. In Switzerland as well as globally, we have many inquiries to identify female talents. There are many female talents, but they must be retained.

H: It is due to the founding of a family and the lack of structures for external child care?
SS: Yes, but working mothers are still not equally accepted in society as in France or the Nordic countries. It is also due to the internal corporate cultures, the overemphasis on male leadership qualities and power struggles that many women do not want to see. In my opinion, the challenges of the future lie in considering male and female leadership qualities to be of equal value and in emphasizing more cooperation".

Full interview: Simone Stebler: 'There are more and more diversity projects.'  By Susan Wagner, 24 April 2019.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Inclusion

Human Resources

Disruption

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

This interview appeared in Handelszeitung's April 2019 print issue.

This interview appeared in Handelszeitung's April 2019 print issue.

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top