How Board Directors Should Handle M&As - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesLondon M&A and Integration Board Dinner: Summer 2019

Philip Aiken, Chair of Aveva & Balfour Beatty, joined to discuss M&A and integration from the board perspective

August 2019

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Key themes emerged from the discussion:

Culture, culture, culture!

Culture is regarded as one of the biggest hurdles in delivering a successful integration and the promised value creation. Molding cultures requires a thoughtful plan: “In the absence of a plan, the most aggressive culture wins!”

Sometimes it is necessary to create a new identity, as existing affiliations can be difficult to dismantle. “Historically, we were green and they were blue, and there was a reticence to come together. So we abolished both colors and created purple."

Act quickly

It is important to be upfront with all affected employees and approach the integration process with speed (in particular: key leadership appointments, retaining valuable staff, structure, office locations, systems integration), even if some mistakes are inevitably made. “We appointed people very quickly to the top roles and always told the truth.” Once the deal is underway, “it is imperative to appoint a sponsor from each side.”

Moreover, it is necessary to act quickly on those executives who do not believe in the deal or do not fit with the future structure. It’s even more important for the board to support and give confidence to those who stay post-deal.

Strategic fit is key

The stakes are high in terms of price and risk, so strategic fit is absolutely key to success. Ideally, M&A opportunities fit within the agreed corporate and inorganic growth strategy. “It is important not to look at deals in an ad-hoc way.”

Linked to this, boards also want to discuss deals as early as possible and in a holistic way versus a purely financial evaluation. Agreed measures of success are critical and will likely be weighted differently for different deals.

Building trust

“If the statistics say 70 percent of M&A deals fail, do boards give in too easily to management?” Relationships and trust are crucial here. The line between governance and management can be particularly sensitive in an M&A scenario.

The board should encourage CEOs and executive teams to be open, balanced in their analysis, and consult and leverage the expertise of the board. It is also vital for management to show they can deliver value from existing transactions.

How do management and the board best align on a deal? “Cultivate it, massage it and then by the time it comes round you are pushing on an open door.” It can also be important for “boards to give confidence to management on the ‘must do deals,’ even if their track record has not historically been great.”

Are boards under-leveraged?

It is critical that boards are proactive; indeed a recent CEO shared frustrations that M&A strategy originates only from the executive team. “Why doesn’t the board come to me with M&A ideas?”

Board directors should be encouraged to get a first-hand understanding of the target/new business (sites, teams, culture) and to share their insights with the CEO and executive team; the concept of the "free-range Director" applies. However, “ultimately, it is about listening, reflecting and not directing!”

It is important to manage any potential risks that any external consultants/advisors, rumors from with the public markets or social media can exert on potential deals, to pressurize an M&A situation.

The right leadership wins

“At the end of the day, vision, leadership and execution will win the day.”

If there is an anticipated M&A agenda, it is worthwhile for boards to be thinking about whether these skills exist around the table and how the NEDs can best support management to build capability in this area.

The CEO leading the current entity may also not be the right fit for the merged entity.

Boards also need to be astute to the often short-term time horizon of millennials with the long-term success horizon of M&A, and implications for motivations and retention/development.

Topics Related to this Article

Culture

Board

CEO

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top