Insights from Women Directors on Workplace Diversity - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesInsights from Women Directors

Egon Zehnder London hosted its second event in a dinner series for women directors of industrial boards.

April 2019

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Hosted by Susan Kilsby, Non Executive Director of Diageo, as our anchor guest, we gathered a group of women directors and discussed a number of key themes, including:

The Path to Chair for Women

It is very rare to be appointed Chair from outside of the company; the female chairs we had around the table had largely been promoted from within. Most felt it is important that boards see potential in people, particularly in first-time chairs. The search firms, as well as the nomination committees, could do more to introduce female candidates that are Chair-ready – utilize Egon Zehnder’s Potential Model and reference candidates ferociously to make sure they are ready for the step-up.

Holding the role of Senior Independent Director (SID) opens up the opportunity to be seen as “chair-ready”; but normally on a different board because of timing/sequencing and because the SID typically handles the chair succession on their own boards and thereby are conflicted.

“We need to focus on getting the SIDs to feel responsible for getting more women elected as chairwomen.”

“The SID is like a Barcelona goalkeeper: most of the time you won’t have to do much, but there are moments where you’ll have to work bloody hard.”

Boards are no different than society at large: 51 percent of the world, and of consumers, are female.

I want a board that comes from the future; comes from where we are going as a business.

It is important that the digital director can contribute more broadly.

We need to focus on getting the SIDs to feel responsible for getting more women elected as chairwomen.

The nomination committee is pivotal to getting more women appointed as CEO.

The role of the RemCo Chair: A blessing or curse?

It seems like chairing the remuneration committee is becoming a stereotypical “woman’s job” on the board, as more and more women are being approached and appointed as RemCo chairs.  Is that potentially diminishing the role?  Most of our guests agreed that – on the contrary – the RemCo chair role has become a very important role on the board: It is often the toughest board leadership role these days, particularly given the scrutiny of pay and benefits. It therefore requires a lot of skill and provides the committee’s leader with the opportunity to have exposure to investors. This in turn is helpful in building an external profile; which is additive on the journey to becoming Chair. Another benefit is that it gives the committee leader the opportunity to refine her board leadership skills – and demonstrate to her fellow directors that she is growing in the role and getting ready for bigger responsibilities around the table.

“Good chairs of Rem will make really good candidates for chair – this is where it is all happening and they will have mastered the art of mediation.”

What are the virtues (if any?) of having a digital director on the board?

Bringing a digital expert or a ”disruptor” to a board can bring significant diversity of thought and help reset mindset and paradigms. However, the integration has to be done well; many directors see this skillset as a “specialty” with too narrow focus, and they are questioning whether the digital director can add value to the broader discussions of the board. As a topic, the room was evenly divided:

“The term ‘digital director’ makes me cringe!”

“It’s not about digital per se; it’s about disruption.”

“We can discuss audit issues for an hour, but once we start discussing operations and how to use AI to transform the business, many board directors get bored very quickly. This worries me.”

“The digital director is like the woman on the board 10 years ago: You need to embrace them.”

“It is important that the digital director can contribute more broadly.”

“You need someone with a strategy view rather than an expert view.”

“The digital director is like the woman on the board 10 years ago: You need to embrace them.”

The pace of transformation on boards: Too slow?

Most organizations are in transition – but does the board transform at the same pace?

We could think about two tracks for directors:  One track will be those who stay for the long term (maybe even beyond 9 years)[CSM1]  to be the foundational/institutional custodians. The other could be those who are brought in to impact shorter term disruptions and are more open to rolling off sooner, once the organization has moved ahead. The goal is to have a “fit for the future” board – and this needs a strong Chair and SID. Most directors are not as aware of the future needs of a business/market/sector as they should be.

“It is not easy to be a CEO of a company in growth and transformation: I had great NEDs, and only three-year tenure as a director of a board doesn’t necessarily look good for a NED, but sometimes that is the right tenure because the needs of the board change very quickly for some companies.”

“On one of my boards, we spend a lot of time debating ‘what’s the board of the future?’  These are fantastic debates, and very important for us.”

“I want a board that comes from the future; comes from where we are going as a business.”

The path to CEO & the role of the NomsCo

The NomsCo should relish the challenge to operate as a proper committee in the same way that audit and remuneration do. Otherwise they can find themselves clambering about, rather than properly considering succession.

Perhaps there would be merit in splitting up the roles of NomsCo chair and Chair of the board? It would give others a chance to have greater exposure and responsibility.

“Boards and nomination committees can play a very important role in making sure that women are considered for CEO succession: we can challenge the assumptions, make sure we include women in the process, and request from the search firm that they challenge us back. The nomination committee is pivotal to getting more women appointed as CEO.”

“There is an inherent assumption that women will not travel or move for an executive promotion, but they are often not even asked about it! … and if you asked her, did you make it compelling for her to do so?”

“Boards are designed by men, for men.”

Conclusion: Our duty as women

“Boards are designed by men and for men.” We as women have an opportunity to proactively lead the discussions that are critical, particularly around engagement & executive succession planning. We have to advocate for better diversity in a proactive way and at every opportunity. “Boards are no different than society at large: 51 percent of the world, and of consumers, are female. Boards should reflect the reality of the human race.”

Download as PDF:

Topics Related to this Article

Inclusion

Leadership

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top