The Uncharted Leadership Voyage - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

The Uncharted Leadership Voyage

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Sudden CEO departures have been constantly in the headlines. The CEO turnover rate hit a record high in 2018 and looks to be accelerating. Recent exits across the globe have been drawing increased attention and speculation, begging the question: what is going on? Are these failures localized? Or is there something more widespread happening here?

Bloomberg Markets asked our CEO, Edilson Camara, this very question earlier this month. “I think the problem is more than company specific,“ Ed replied, “the level of uncertainty, of unpredictability in business, is absolutely unprecedented.” Disruption in business has been largely intermittent in the past, usually occurring in interruptive spurts. Now disruption is ubiquitous to the business cycle; it is the new steady state. It’s a vastly different world and the implications for leadership are extensive.

“We believe that it is almost impossible for a CEO or a leader to be prepared for the uncertainties in the market,” Ed explained. In dealing with this new reality, the advice we give our clients, he continued, is to make sure that senior leaders and future CEOs are on “a continuous journey of self-development to get prepared for something they haven’t seen before.” It is entirely possible, he added, “that perhaps part of the explanation of several disappointing stories in the corporate world were related to leaders who were not prepared to start their own journey in terms of getting ready for something that they haven’t faced before.”

The theory is supported by several findings from our survey, The CEO: A Personal Reflection. Of the over 402 respondents from 11 countries, nearly 68% admitted they felt unprepared for certain parts of the job. Sufficient development for necessary new leadership skills is lacking, but CEOs are forthright about their need for it. When we asked if they needed the capacity to transform themselves before they could sufficiently transform their organizations, 79% said yes. Most indicated that they had not been given the time or the opportunity for this kind of immersive, ongoing development. Almost half (44%) did not go through a formal succession process; slightly more (48%) said that finding time for personal reflection once in the role was a lot tougher than they had expected. Many were surprised by several aspects of their role: both developing the senior team (48%) and driving culture change (50%) were harder and more complicated than anticipated. “It is interesting, and somehow shocking, that once someone gets into the top leadership role in a company or enterprise, the assumption is that they are ready for the job,” Ed added.

The era of the hero CEO is over.

Ed Camara, CEO of Egon Zehnder

Is there a way to help CEOs become better prepared? What we have discovered is that many CEOs feel ready for what we call the “Doing” parts of the job—the prior achievements and experience-oriented preparation for the role. According to our survey, more than four-fifths (82%) said they were comfortable shaping the overall vision for the company. But when it comes to the “Being” aspects of the position—actually embodying the emotional and human components required of CEO leaders—they need a great deal more development and support.

To lead through these highly unpredictable times, CEOs need to develop a mindset of constant personal growth, so that they are able to build and sustain the openness and adaptability their journey will require. They must be trained to listen for and lead into what Frederic Laloux, the noted author of Reinventing Organizations, calls a company’s evolutionary purpose. “The world has become so complex,” Laloux says, “that the best we can do, the most powerful thing we can do, is not predict and control but sense and respond.” Attention to cultivating this presence of clarity and purpose is the often overlooked developmental crux of effective CEO leadership today.

When Ed was asked what does it take to be a successful CEO amid such widespread uncertainty and challenge, he didn’t hesitate: “It starts with the person. It starts with the CEO him or herself understanding that it is from within, that it is from their own self-awareness and self-knowledge, realizing their own limitations and embracing the need to be helped.” CEOs are openly acknowledging that they are on a learning curve. “The job demands more patience than what I expected,” one said in our survey, “I think one has to go through a maturity cycle.” Another had come to understand, “I don’t have all the answers and also do not need to have them.”

Clearly the kind of leadership required for success today has changed. The hierarchical and clinical approach to being CEO no longer works or, in Ed’s words, “the era of the hero CEO is over.” Today’s CEOs need, above all else, to bring into the role a mindset of constant personal growth totally foreign to their predecessors. This journey of self-transformation should begin deliberately in their earlier development and continue throughout their tenures.

It is often said that an organization cannot perform higher than its leadership consciousness. We believe that to be true. Obviously, the gaps in preparedness for the CEO role today may never be “solved.” But by better supporting CEOs ongoing growth and development, we invite a greater likelihood of increased confidence and performance.

< Volume 3
Leading a Collaborative Enterprise

Volume 5 >
The Boardroom as a Leadership Laboratory

Explore more of our CEO Insights editions.

Get the Insights

Topics Related to this Article

CEO

Leadership

CEO Role Transformation

Leadership Development

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Back to CEO Insights

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top