Making 'Lateral Entry' Work: How India Can Tap into New sources of Leadership Talent - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Executive SearchThe Hindu – Making 'Lateral Entry' Work

August 2018

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Originally published in The Hindu, 14 August 2018.

How India can tap into new sources of leadership talent

Most CEOs are grappling with one particular challenge, irrespective of industry or geography: getting the right leadership talent. Governments face this challenge too. The Indian government has responded to this challenge by taking the initiative to invite executives from beyond the ranks of the civil service to apply for certain Joint Secretary posts. While the idea clearly has merit, success is not automatically guaranteed. At Egon Zehnder we have worked extensively with governments around the world on similar initiatives, and have identified five elements that increase the chances of success.

Establish objective criteria.

The key decision makers involved in making a senior appointment rarely agree on what skills, qualities and experiences the role requires— and when they do, there is no guarantee that the requirements agreed to are the ones that are actually needed to be successful. This is why the process must begin with a real probing of the position and its larger context. For example, prior to one county’s national elections, we were asked to establish the hiring criteria for 100 key governmental appointments. We interviewed current and former officeholders; mapped strategic priorities; and factored in the cultural differences between ministries. The result: a foundational talent strategy that could be used by whichever party won.

Having objective criteria also gives decision makers confidence that their appointments will be able to stand up to public scrutiny without fear of seeming biased towards or against candidates for caste, geography, political affiliation or other considerations.

Target the talent you need.

Public announcements inviting lateral entry applicants for open government positions preserve transparency but are not very effective recruiting strategies. Top talent has many options outside of public service. Government, therefore, cannot sit back and wait for these candidates to present themselves. It must proactively identify and approach executives with the desired skills and experience. Precisely because the competition for talent is so intense, most successful corporations — even those regarded as highly desirable employers — follow this strategy. Very often governments are reluctant to follow suit so as to not appear to favour candidates. This is where the objective criteria come in. The fact that a given executive is approached and encouraged to apply is no guarantee that he or she will be appointed.

We worked with a freshly installed administration in Latin America to build an extensive database of hundreds of private sector leaders considered to have the skills necessary to help fight the country’s urgent economic and social challenges. These executives were then proactively invited to apply and added to the pool of open application candidates. We then assessed this expanded group and recommended numerous successful candidates to key roles.

Look for potential to succeed in this environment.

Our work with governments around the world suggests that in addition to the right motivation there are three key personal traits that predict success of lateral hires in such roles.

The first is resilience. Government bureaucracy can be tough on outsiders; it is essential to have the ability to persevere in the face of constant pulls and pressures and aligning multiple stakeholders.

Successful lateral hires also have a high level of curiosity. They acknowledge that they don’t have all the answers, are eager to learn and model their behaviour accordingly. These candidates know that while they may have many useful new ideas, they also have much to learn from career civil servants and that government has its own systems, formal and informal, that must be grasped before any innovations can be proposed.

Finally, they have the ability to engage others. The ability to build consensus among stakeholders is essential.

Less is more when it comes to selection panels

The government screening process traditionally includes appearing before a section panel of three to five interviewers, who each take their turn investigating topics they have divided between themselves. Unfortunately, this approach often results in only a surface-level understanding of the candidate. We have found that one-on-one or two-on-one interviews allow for a much more meaningful exploration of key points of a candidate’s career, their mindset and approach.

More focussed interviews should be supplemented with extensive referencing with finalist candidates. This combination of data will provide insight into a candidate’s character, integrity and moral compass — all critical qualities for government roles.

Accelerate the new hire’s integration.

Successful recruiting is only part of the equation; the selected lateral hire must also be primed for success in his or her new organisation. We were able to demonstrate the benefits of a systematic approach with a senior executive that we hired for the cabinet of a European country. We started by identifying cultural differences between the executive’s old and new environments and helped develop strategies the executive could use to navigate this change. We then created an extensive playbook with detailed profiles of the management team outlining each person’s priorities and concerns, and provided coaching to help the executive best position himself with his new peers.

India’s lateral entry programme has the potential to introduce new thinking and new expertise into key ministries. Leveraging on lessons learned elsewhere will allow India to more completely draw from the country’s rich array of talent while maintaining the objectivity necessary to preserve the public trust.

Topics Related to this Article

Public & Social Sector

CEO

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top