What the Next Generation Wants From Its Leaders and What Business Needs To Do About It - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Inclusive LeadershipWhat the Next Generation Wants From Its Leaders and What Business Needs To Do About It

This conversation can’t just be about women: It has to include everyone, regardless of gender or generation.

March 2019

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Today marks the fifth year of Egon Zehnder’s Leaders & Daughters events in London. We introduced the initiative to start a conversation, bringing together leaders, their daughters, and mentees to explore together the opportunity gap faced by the next generation of women leaders.

Crucially, this programme acknowledges that this conversation can’t just be about women. It has to include everyone, regardless of gender or generation.

The need for that conversation has been underlined by the research we conducted this year asking executives - at every career level, across generations and geographies - about what really matters to them in their professional and personal lives.

We’ve found that the assumptions that are often made about men and women having different career aspirations and priorities don’t stand up. The men and women we spoke to share a very similar outlook on where they want their careers to go, and how to achieve work-life balance.

But it’s clear that, with new generations entering the workplace, there is a shift in perspectives.

This isn’t about the often quoted stereotypes of millennials. The qualities younger generations expect to see in their leaders are different compared to those who have gone before them. They prize humility over resilience, and many see a lack of mentoring or sponsorship at work as a real barrier to achieving their career aspirations.

"Leaders need to think carefully about how they can meet the changing expectations of the next generation, and organisations should reassess whether the way they identify and develop the leaders of the future is still effective."

This means that leaders will need to think carefully about how they can meet the changing expectations of them, and organisations should reassess whether the way they identify and develop the leaders of the future is still effective.

But both the research and our work with organisations tell us there are some principles that can help meet the challenge.

Mentorship

Leaders & Daughters is founded on an understanding of the influence generations can have on one another.

My parents, my education, and the emerging market environment I grew up in had a huge influence on me. I know the mindset I still apply to this day - of resilience, accountability, challenging myself and others - was shaped early on.

Organisations have a role to play in this too. We can all point to particular individuals who have had made an impact on us when starting our career, but one thing that has come across strongly over the five years of Leaders & Daughters is that this isn’t a one way street – mentors can benefit too. You just have to read the letters parents have written to their daughters to accompany the initiative to see the influence children can have on their parents.

There is no single approach to embedding mentorship, but senior leaders should appreciate the value a programme can have, actively engage with it themselves, and recognise those who are strong mentors within their organisation.

Openness and authenticity

We cannot expect our leaders to be all things to all people. But the old approach of command and control, of the ‘hero’ leader, won’t work anymore. Being open, honest, and authentic can help a leader engage and motivate their colleagues, regardless of which generation they are from.

Leading with purpose

More and more organisations are seeking people who can lead with purpose and engage the whole workforce and the next generation in a different way. The task for all of us is to ensure that we are preparing our leaders to do this, and equipping the next generation of leaders with the skills and perspective to manage the changes that will face them in turn.

Adapting to these changes has always been a challenge - every generation is different to the last. But leaders do have to make sure they understand the shifting expectations on them. If they are to do that, we need to keep this conversation going.

Egon Zehnder’s Leaders & Daughters initiative helps harness the energy and excitement of a new wave of female leaders, along with the wisdom and experience of seasoned leaders. The goal: To pave a path to a better world.

Learn more about Leaders & Daughters by visiting www.egonzehnder.com/leaders-and-daughters

This year’s theme – Power Moves: A New Generation of Women Transforms Leadership – addresses how emerging generations sees the world differently. Their aspirations, values, and viewpoints challenge traditional ways of thinking.  As older generations leaves the workforce, how will this shift in power and perspective reshape organizations?

Stay up to date on the 30+ events happening worldwide via the #LeadersAndDaughters hashtag.

#LeadersAndDaughters #BalanceForBetter #IWD2019

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Inclusion

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top