It Takes Discipline—and Behavior Change—To Build a Successful Board - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesIt Takes Discipline—and Behavior Change—To Build a Successful Board

In our role as leadership advisors, we are often asked to conduct board effectiveness reviews.

May 2018

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

These comprehensive studies help boards improve their performance by recommending specific changes that impact board dynamics, process improvements and governance.  One of the most common recommendations—particularly among growing enterprises transitioning to a more professionalized boardroom—is to establish a robust process for recruiting independent directors.

A well-chosen slate of independent directors can significantly strengthen a board and contribute to the success and perpetuity of the enterprise.

The independent director recruitment process often starts well. We meet with the chair of the board or of the nominations and remuneration committee (NRC) and discuss the strategic issues facing the company, the board’s relationship with management and the diversity of perspective and experience that the board needs. We add our own knowledge of the space along with an analysis of the current members to create a competency profile of the director to be recruited.

Often, however, these guiding principles fall by the wayside. Instead of reflecting the big-picture strategic issues facing the company, the independent director is chosen on the basis of familiarity or comfort emerging from past affiliation. Sometimes, there may be tactical considerations at work, with the board chair appointing someone from a potential acquisition target or a “brand name” that will appeal to lenders or investors.

These approaches are perfectly rational—yet they are more than likely to prevent the board from fulfilling its potential.

The whole point of adding independent directors is to bring outside perspective and critical distance that can help the board with its decision making and risk management. By definition, this cannot be done by directors who are family members, insiders or who may have vested interests. And as for using board seats to accelerate an acquisition or boost access to capital, we believe that these sorts of initiatives should be the responsibility of the CEO and his or her executive team; the board’s job is to provide oversight and counsel.

The core issue is this: As companies grow from being founder-centered enterprises to more complex and self-sustaining, boards must transition from being tactical instruments for transactions and compliance to becoming strategic assets focused on oversight and helping management navigate increasingly complex objectives.

The only way to do this is for the board chair to step back and allow the NRC to take charge of director nominations. This is necessary not just to make board composition more process-driven, but because managing board composition and director succession is an ongoing commitment—one that involves identifying gaps in the board’s competencies, proactively developing relationships with potential directors and managing the cadence of director turnover. This range of tasks is much better suited to a committee than an individual.

Of course, this presupposes that the NRC is fully equipped and empowered to manage board succession. The committee should be chaired by someone other than the board chair, and ideally, the majority of members should be independent directors. Further, committee members should have the governance experience to “know what good looks like.” This broader perspective should give them the authority to frame the board’s director succession planning and compensation strategy.

Companies that professionalize their approach to board composition will be rewarded.

For example, we were asked by a newly-incorporated automotive parts manufacturer to help establish its board. The chair had the foresight to specify that the directors should be drawn from a range of industries and backgrounds, including corporate strategy, manufacturing and finance. This diversity of boardroom talent—and the free rein the board was given by the founder—allowed the board to quickly become an invaluable asset to the management team, with the two collaborating on strategy, challenging assumptions and debating various acquisition possibilities.

A second example involved a North American enterprise that purchased an Asian company and rebuilt the latter’s board to give it greater strategic capability. Working with group headquarters, we developed a list of desired experiences to be represented around the boardroom table, including multinational M&A, corporate turnaround, a stint working at the global headquarters of a multinational corporation and deep knowledge of the local economy. We also suggested as many of the directors as possible should be retired CEOs so that they could provide business and governance advice at inflection points in the company’s life cycle. Over the course of six months, five new independent directors were recruited to the board, and following a comprehensive onboarding process, they are becoming a key strategic resource to management.

That more boards are realizing the importance of professionalizing the director nomination process is an important step toward world-class corporate governance. But this evolution calls for more than following external guidelines and regulations—it requires a change in behavior and thinking.

Topics Related to this Article

Board

Disruption

Leadership

Talent Management

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top