The Future-Ready Board: What It Takes to Lead in a BANI World - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesThe Future-Ready Board: What It Takes to Lead in a BANI World

September 2025

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Boards once geared themselves for operating in a VUCA world (Volatile, Uncertain, Complex and Ambiguous). Today, directors face a combination of pre-existing disruption and new geopolitical realities: BANI (Brittle, Anxious, Nonlinear and Incomprehensible) environment, where traditional governance models may be cracking under pressure. A once-reliable cadence of quarterly meetings, site visits and annual off-site working sessions can’t keep up with the constant pace of change—be it geopolitical, technological (AI’s impact on the future of work alone will require a new approach) or cultural.

A future-ready board must be agile to support and guide leadership teams in this ever-evolving, noise-filled ecosystem effectively. We see three dimensions as critical to fulfilling a board’s mandate:

the importance of providing (and demanding) the space to stay forward-looking despite today’s often necessary “game of whack-a-mole” that can easily usurp any future-focused mind space

the importance of having the right mix of voices (board composition)

and the right behaviors (board culture) in the boardroom.

Balancing Oversight and Foresight

The most effective boards today are forward-leaning and deeply engaged. They equally support the leadership team in prioritizing initiatives to drive performance today and guide them in defining the questions that enable a company to thrive. Boards can achieve this by embracing agility: the capacity to adapt with speed and clarity. They often practice scenario planning, hold unscheduled convenings, and seek outside expertise, all of which are powerful tools to make them better equipped to anticipate and respond to disruption. But agility also depends on mindset. Board directors must model learning behavior—staying curious, asking hard questions, embracing experimentation and being a student of the respective business, attuned to consumer and market trends.

Oversight and foresight have always been the mandate of any board but leaning into both and ensuring that foresight does not fall by the wayside matters now more than ever.

Rethinking Board Composition

This focus on foresight and agility requires a hard look at who is sitting at the table. With relatively few board seats and a shifting environment, every director and every director’s contribution matters. In the past, boardrooms have skewed heavily toward financial, legal, and operational backgrounds. But in a BANI world, new kinds of expertise may also be critical.

Some boards may benefit from functional and category expertise—such as digital transformation, ESG, geopolitical risk, and talent. This expertise helps to navigate complexities with specialized knowledge and insights. However, balancing this with an enterprise perspective and relevant industry expertise is equally important. CEOs who have actively led through crises or transformations bring an invaluable external lens to the board. They understand rapid shifts and can provide strategic guidance that others might not be able to.

Generational and experiential diversity are also significant. Boards that integrate fresh voices—through term limits, creative pipelines, or other board programs—gain a more current understanding of emerging customer behaviors or technology innovations, for example.

The true magic lies in the blend. How do you curate the right portfolio of backgrounds across experience and recency, outside and industry perspective and functional depth and enterprise view given the company’s opportunities and challenges? Being intentional in bringing together varied perspectives will foster constructive creative friction and enable richer discussions. By weaving these elements together, boards can be agile, can inspire and drive long-term success while being prepared for immediate challenges.

Building and Maintaining a Culture to Enable Strategic Intent

An often undervalued lever at the board’s disposal is culture. Culture is not just a set of values or a purpose statement; it is the lived behaviors of an organization, or on a board — how decisions are made, how resilience is celebrated, how dissent is welcomed, and how actions align with stated values and with strategic intent. It determines whether a company can sustain innovation, weather shocks, and retain talent through turbulence.

Boards should invest in being explicit about their own culture, asking themselves:

What behaviors are required to successfully guide their company?

What is the expectation of board directors at the table?

And how is the relationship between board directors and executive team, between Chair/Independent Lead Director and CEO lived?

In today’s environment, we believe trust and transparency to be crucial. CEOs need true sparring partners and sounding boards, which requires building relationships that are grounded in psychological safety, strategic alignment, and shared purpose. As Ashley Summerfield, global leader of Egon Zehnder’s Board and CEO Practice says, “The boardroom should be a safe but not a soft space.”

The most impactful boards don’t just challenge—they inspire. They help CEOs reconnect to long-term vision, define strategic priorities (maybe even encourage bold bets), and evolve organizational culture to reinforce those behaviors that will enable strategy implementation, starting at the top.

Inspiring a New Era of Board Leadership

The board as the steward of a company’s long-term success and value creation is becoming ever more critical. And, as the corporate landscape continues to shift, a new operating model for boards is emerging. One that is strategic, developmental, and deeply human.

It blends oversight with foresight. It carefully curates the composition to include a variety of diverse experiences to prompt and promote the right breadth and depth of discussions. And it invests in a board culture that allows these discussions to be productive, turning challenge into inspiration, into action and into opportunity. This requires self-reflection on how to interact, how to empathize, how to challenge and how to find the collective will to adapt. It is the boards that prioritize their humanity as much as their mandate that will set the pace for a new era of board leadership. The resilience needed to navigate a BANI world is not built on process alone, it is built on people.

Topics Related to this Article

Board

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top