Tracking Progress of Board Diversity Globally - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Global Board Diversity Tracker 2024

The Progress of Board Diversity: Slow Advancement Amid Waves of Change

Two decades of tracking board diversity reveal gradual, steady change and ongoing corporate commitment despite resistance.

December 2024

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

For 20 years, Egon Zehnder has tracked board diversity around the globe, witnessing many milestones, steps forward, and setbacks. The path to progress has been uneven at times but incremental gains have been constant. Over the span of 12 years, from 2012 to 2024, the percentage of board positions held by women globally has risen steadily from 13.6 % to 29.3%, with an average increment of 2.6% change every two years.

We have also seen external social forces influence the pace of change. For example, 2017’s #MeToo movement and 2020’s racial equity protests both prompted global surges in corporate DEI commitments that often led to representational increases in the following years:

Globally the number of companies that have a woman on the board rose from 84.9% in 2018 to 96% in 2024.

In 2020, black directors comprised about 5% of directorships of Russell 3000 companies, and in 2022 that number rose to 8.1%.

Now, the pendulum is swinging again. Trends beget countertrends, and a dissenting opinion has emerged, with programs designed to increase diverse representation in business under attack in social media and even in some courtrooms, particularly in the US. There are some indications that the shift to defending DEI rather than promoting it has created a chilling effect. When we examined the number of new female directors appointed globally in 2024, there was a considerable drop in the percentage of appointments made: from 17.2 % of appointments in 2020 to 16.3% in 2022 and now 14.2% in 2024. Additionally, there has been a decrease in appointments of ethnic and racial minority directors. Looking at new directors in the S&P 500, people of color represented 34.1% of new board members in 2022, that number fell to 24.2% in 2024.

Still, some media outlets are quick to draw early conclusions—that “DEI is dead”—when the evidence reveals a different story. What we see is a more contested DEI terrain. And while this threatens to stall progress, it also presents another opportunity to reframe the focus and goals of diversity and inclusion to respond to this moment in time and sustain change.

Board Diversity Data from C-Suite and Board Leaders

Our conversations with C-suite and board leaders indicate that they are continuing to work toward more diverse representation and greater inclusion, even if they may be more moderated in their tone and pace.  In our experience, executives still consider diversity critical to their business performance and expect these efforts to become more important over the next few years. Many companies are taking this inflection point to refresh their approaches toward achieving greater inclusion of all forms of diversity.

To me, it seems clear that the questions raised by DEI critics present potential opportunities for innovation, not deletion.

Cynthia Soledad

Global Head of DEI at Egon Zehnder

Our new data on board diversification and inclusion supports our overall finding of gradual, incremental progress that has slowed down somewhat but continues:

However, representation is just the first step.

The increasingly important, looming goal is for boards to create more inclusive cultures in order to leverage the increase in diverse representation around the table. It is largely the Chair’s responsibility to take the lead in building more inclusive board culture and practice. They and other leaders recognize that more inclusive, adaptable organizations are critical for addressing big challenges such as widespread market disruption, climate change and AI. The modest uptick in functional diversity on boards is potentially a response to this need and a solid first step in this direction. Much more work will be needed.

Our 2024-2025 Global Board Diversity Tracker shows the progress that has been made over the last 20 years in diversifying boards. We hope it continues.

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Download the full report

Download Now

Media Requests

Martin Klusmann
Global Marketing Lead
martin.klusmann@egonzehnder.com

Global Diversity Specialist:
Raminder Kaur

Research: Sonika Ganjoo, Dirghi Agarwal
and Atul Dhingra with data from BoardEx

Editorial Team

Content Leads: Cheryl Soltis Martel, Luisa Zottis
and Hampton Carey

Digital Leads: Joanna Scheffel, Amadeu Porto
and Shed Collective

Design: Richard Khuptong, Aditya Gupta,
Sakshi Kakkar, Vikramjeet Singh Rakhroy,
Dora Tubik and Markus Schuler

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top