Egon Zehnder's First Lady - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Inclusive LeadershipEgon Zehnder's First Lady

Chairwoman Jill Ader discusses the future of leadership in a feature with Wirtschaft Magazine.

December 2018

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

This feature originally appeared in Wirtschaft Magazine on November 18, 2018.

At first glance she looks as if butter wouldn't melt in her mouth: Jill Ader's presence is precisely what one would expect of an Englishwoman: soft-spoken, a touch on the formal side, and with that typically dry British sense of humor.

That said, the new woman at the helm of Switzerland’s largest executive search firm, Egon Zehnder, is highly unlikely to go down in the company's history as harmless. Even her appointment made waves: With her election to chairwoman of the executive search giant she made it clear that she is a past master of C-suite power games. In the race for the top job, Ader coolly and surprisingly left CEO Rajeev Vasudeva trailing in her wake. In the meantime, he is no longer CEO but just a partner at the firm.

She's aiming to change quite a few things but hold fast to the values.

Jill Ader took up her new role on November 1. As she did so, she also put an end to two traditions: Firstly, ever since the firm’s founding father Egon Zehnder stepped down eighteen years ago, the CEO has always gone on to chair this discreet executive search firm with its headquarters in Zurich. And secondly, Ader is the first woman ever to hold the top job at Egon Zehnder.

“The days of the dominant heroic leader are over. We need integrational leaders who are capable of self-reflection.”

Jill Ader, Egon Zehnder Chairwoman

“I wanted to give the partners a real choice,” says the 58-year-old manager. “What kind of firm would only put forward a single candidate for such an important position?”

A mother of three grown-up children, Ader hints at wanting to change quite a few things at the firm, which posts annual revenues of 670 million Swiss francs and is the global number three in the field of executive search. In order to do so, in the foreseeable future she will be moving to Zurich.

In Switzerland, if not elsewhere, the firm has a relatively traditional, conservative, male-dominated image – for which in women’s business circles it occasionally comes in for private criticism.  In a substantial article written a couple of years ago, business journal Bilanz referred to the corporate culture as being “almost like a religious order”.

Ader considers the description exaggerated. And yet working for Zehnder is something like a mission. Speak with partners and consultants and you sense a certain conceit vis-à-vis the competition, from whom as a matter of principle no employees are recruited. Because in its executive search role, Zehnder works for fixed fees and not for a commission that depends on the annual salary of the successful candidate. That’s what the competition does and the people at Zehnder expressly distance themselves from a practice that tends to drive the salaries of corporate leaders even higher.

“Egon laid down fantastic values that we are not about to change, and these include our system of fees,” says the new boss. The firm’s founding father, now 88, congratulated Ader on her election as they lunched together.

The proportion of women partners is to rise from 24 to 30 percent

It emerges clearly that as the first woman to head up Egon Zehnder, one major topic that Ader, who holds an MBA from the London Business School, is aiming to drive forward is diversity. While women are in demand for leadership roles around the world, and clients now invariably want to see female candidates included among those presented as potential CEOs, Egon Zehnder itself still has some ground to make up when it comes to gender parity. 24 percent of its partners are women. “Of course I’m not happy with that,” says Ader.

Image – Michele Limina, Sonntagszeitung

As a manager herself, Ader knows from experience what women have to contend with in the attempt to deal successfully with both their profession and a family, and how wearing it can be. “When I had my third child I hit a crisis and began to doubt whether I would ever find my way back into my job,” she recalls. At the time, her husband encouraged her by saying that it was perfectly OK with him if she decided to stay at home. “Just knowing that I had the option of stopping work gave me strength,” Ader says.

In the next five years, she wants to increase the proportion of female partners to at least 30 percent. She is convinced that female strengths, which in the past have rarely been brought to bear, are more in demand in the new world of business. “The days of the dominant heroic leader are over,” she says. “That’s not the way it works anymore. We need integrational leaders who are capable of self-reflection.”

This poses new challenges for the executive search industry as a whole, given that it was geared to reviewing candidates for the top job in terms of their past performance and presence. Today, Ader says, they need to be examined in terms of how well they know themselves and how they approach their own weaknesses. “Most top managers are unaccustomed to dealing with their own vulnerability,” she says. And for Ader it is precisely this self-reflection that is a must for leaders who hope to succeed.

This is why Egon Zehnder is aiming to expand its leadership advisory business. Executive search remains its core activity – an activity that is currently growing, above all in Germany, the USA and the UK, but in Switzerland too. But for a long time now Zehnder has also been focusing on the field of executive development, where the firm posted double-digit revenue growth last year. And Jill Ader is aiming to foster that growth.

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership

Inclusion

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top