Egon Zehnder - Leaders & Daughters

To My Daughter

Read all letters

To My Daughter

To My Daughter was a global initiative launched in 2017 inviting fathers, mothers, and mentors to share letters of guidance and wisdom with the young women in their lives. Some wrote to daughters, others to mentees or to relatives.

The campaign received more than 160 letters and photos, which remain available here.

Rooted in Egon Zehnder's Leaders & Daughters event series, the To My Daughter campaign encouraged participants to put into words their hopes and guidance for the next generation, capturing a collective commitment to supporting future female leaders.

Featured Letters

Mona Sutphen

Former White House Deputy Chief of Staff for Policy, President Obama

Have Fun, Life is Short

Today you’re 14 and already an amazing, inspiring young woman. I feel lucky to be able to get a glimpse of the woman you will become, even if you can’t quite see it yet.

Chip Bergh

Chief Executive Officer, Levi Strauss & Co.

Work isn't work if you are having fun.

Dear Elin, I’m contributing to a series of letters from “Leaders” to their Daughters. As I write this, you are about two months away from finishing fourth grade.

Brad Stevens

Head Coach, Boston Celtics

Be a Great Teammate

Dear Kinsley: When I was asked to write you a letter for the Leaders and Daughters Event series, I thought of the many different things that I would love say to express what you mean to me, and how excited I am to have a front row seat in your journey through life.

Jill Ader

Chairwoman, Egon Zehnder

Equality is the North Star

To my amazing daughter, Natalie: As you turn 18 this month, and just as Egon Zehnder launches our global Leaders & Daughters initiative of writing to our daughters, it feels…

Judy Woodruff

Anchor & Managing Editor, PBS Newshour

Love As Much As You Are Loved

Dearest Hemi, There are so many things I want to say, but my main message is simply how deeply proud I am of you.  It’s hard to believe how fast…

Caroline Rush

CEO, British Fashion Council

Here’s to Your Life

Dear Lana, Let me start by saying that I am so incredibly proud of you, the person you are and what you have already achieved that I could burst.

Leo Puri

Former CEO, UTI

Stay Close, Even As You Keep Soaring

Dear Menaka and Mala, Too late now, perhaps, for advice, though you are barely into your twenties. You have already spread your wings, riding tailwinds and braving headwinds as you…

Alexandra Trower

Executive Vice President, Global Communications, The Estée Lauder Companies

Define Success For Yourself

Dearest Grace, Over the last three decades, I have learned a lot. Working in corporate America has taught me that mistakes are the best teachers.

Shannon Watts

Founder, Moms Demand Action

Give, Give, Give

To my daughters: It's hackneyed, but it's true - the saying that life goes so fast, and picks up speed as you get older. Shockingly, when I look in the…

Curtis Butler

Managing Director, J.P. Morgan Asset Management

You Are Your Own Best Guide

But before I offer my “greatest hits” of advice, let me first share the most important message: how much I love you.

Rooted in Egon Zehnder's Leaders & Daughters event series, the To My Daughter campaign encouraged participants to put into words their hopes and guidance for the next generation, capturing a collective commitment to supporting future female leaders.

Read All Letters

More Letters

Valerie Pascoe

National PR Director and Consultant

Always Go For The Rebound

Dear Charlotte and Julia, I’m so proud you. Today, at the ages of 10 and 13, you are both confident, gutsy and full of fire. In the next few years, as you become teenagers and young women, I want you to remember how you feel RIGHT NOW.

David J Neighbors

Partner, CLA

Sara's graduation letter

My dearest Sara: I hope you read this. No one knows if there may be a pop quiz at some point. If you do not have time now, please keep this letter and read it whenever you think of me.

Cynthia Soledad

Consultant, Egon Zehnder

The Work You Do Matters

To my daughter on the eve of her 15th birthday, 3 days before International Women’s Day 2019: I’m writing this on a plane. Another business trip. You asked me before I left why I have to travel so much for work.

Angela Ahrendts

Former SVP Retail, Apple

Angela Ahrendts: Always Be Present

Dear Sommer and Angelina: Hopefully you won't read anything in this letter that you haven't already heard from me many times before. I've always tried to lead by example when…

Eric Sprunk

Chief Operating Officer, Nike

Eric Sprunk: I Want You to Have It All

To my daughter: I always want to believe you will work in an environment that recognizes that diversity and inclusion is the key to creativity, innovation and business success. It…

Emily Chang

Chief Commercial Officer, Greater China, IHG.

Emily Chang: Go Play in Traffic!

Dear Egon Zehnder, Thank you for inviting me to be part of your Leaders & Daughters campaign to collectively inspire, cultivate and pave a better future for the next generation…

Greg Creed

CEO, Yum! Brands

Greg Creed: Courageous Woman

Dear Lauren, It’s hard to believe that you are turning 30 this year, which only reinforces my belief that the days can be long but the years are always short.…

Martellus Bennett

Super Bowl LI Champion

Martellus Bennett: Daddy’s Gotcha!

Dear Jett the Adventurer: They say that black girls can’t fly. I write this as I watch you dance in the clouds underneath a starry sky. Anything is possible! EVERYONE…

Elliott Hill

President of Consumer and Marketplace, Nike

Nike's Elliott Hill: A Huge Step Forward

Peyton, A week ago, you and I went for a hike that I still think about. Spring Break had just started, and it was a perfect day to be outdoors.…

Stephanie Mehta

Editor-in-chief, Fast Company

Stephanie Mehta: On Friendship

Dear Claire and Grace, I have always admired the ways in which both of you make—and keep—friends. Grace: on the first day of school, you often come home with tales…

Deborah Lee James

Former Secretary, U.S. Air Force

Deborah Lee James: The Proudest Mom on Planet Earth

Dearest Regina, I write you this letter as the most proud mom on planet Earth. There's nothing really new about this because I have felt this way since the day…

Karen Quintos

EVP & Chief Customer Officer, Dell

Karen Quintos: For Carmella and Elle: My Top 10 List

There are never enough words or times to tell you how much hope, optimism and inspiration you bring to me, each and every day. Clearly, the very best thing I…

View All Letters