Lack of Digital Leaders a Key 2019 Risk for Miners - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Mining & MetalsLack of Digital Leaders a Key 2019 Risk for Miners

Egon Zehnder research shows that only 28% of mining companies have created or expanded senior leadership roles that focus on digitization.

February 2019

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

During September 2018, the Egon Zehnder Mining and Metals team analyzed the top 40 mining and metals companies worldwide and found that only 28% of them have created or expanded senior leadership roles that focus on digitalization (augmented reality, Internet of Things, artificial intelligence and blockchain, etc.).

Of the executives in these senior leadership roles, only 18% have a digital background, with 46% having a traditional mining background.

So far, most of the efforts to digitize the mining and metals industry have been disjointed and piecemeal, occurring in isolated parts of the company or in niche areas.

Some companies have significantly changed the scale and pace of operations for mining and metal refining companies. For example, blockchain technology has transformed the way De Beers, a diamond exploration and mining company, is able to track a diamond across the value chain, using a system called Tracr. Gold producer Iamgold has also focused on blockchain, investing in fintech firm Emergent Technology Holdings, a gold supply chain and digital token platform. Back on the ground, Rio Tinto and BHP are employing fully automated mines operated via remote control centers located offsite as part of their innovation efforts.

Yet simply adopting new technology isn't enough. You need leaders who can drive a digital transformation.

Without strong digital leaders to execute these large-scale changes, companies will not succeed—and, in fact, may be setting themselves up for possible extinction.

Sourcing digital talent: Expertise and experience needed

Mining companies face two principal issues as they try to scale digital innovation: Finding executives with needed digital and leadership skills, and placing those executives in the right level within the company.

Unfortunately, executives who can lead fundamental digital transformations are rare. The role of a "digital transformational leader" is new and the pool of talent is not firmly established.

In addition, Egon Zehnder's study found that executives with relevant skills, such as automation or telematics, are typically appointed below the C-suite, which may not give them the seniority or perspective needed to drive an organization-wide digital strategy.

While these skilled executives can translate the application of digital initiatives within a technical mining environment, they may not be capable of driving a holistic digital transformation, which requires fully examining the strategy, culture, commitment, and capability of their organization to deliver.

How can metals and mining companies get the talent they need into the right positions? One way is to consider talent from outside of the industry. The type and level of appointment of these executives largely depends on the nature or scale of the innovation strategy; however, given the fundamental changes in other industries, a C-suite appointment will emphasize the transformational focus.

"The role of a 'digital transformational leader' is new and the pool of talent is not firmly established."

Global resources company BHP is a good example of how to appoint digital leadership to drive transformation at a global level.

Diane Jurgens joined BHP from General Motors and became chief technology officer in 2016, a newly created role reporting to the CEO. Jurgens' role, in her own words, is to "balance the incredible speed of progress with the long-term nature of mines to capture the dividends that technology can deliver."

Since her appointment, BHP has made significant strides in globalizing its technology function, in part by combining research and development, program delivery, and operational technology. BHP's new technology-enabled operating model allows for the application of a "systems engineering approach" to all operations, exploration, and development activities.

This makes it possible to analyze mine lifecycles, identify constraints, and prioritize investments across BHP's global asset portfolio, which is composed of 12 core assets, two seaports and more than 1,000km of rail network. Perhaps most importantly, it facilitates rapid replication of best practices across their operations.

Another way to find talent is to look for transformational leaders who have a critical blend of experiences, competencies, and future potential to be successful, given the unique complexities that mining and metals companies face.

Egon Zehnder has found that irrespective of the digital leader organizations require, there are four qualities great leaders share.

They are curious, insightful, engaged, and determined.

This is collectively referred to as "potential". High-potential executives have the ability to adapt to ever-changing business environments and grow into challenging new roles—an essential component of digital leadership.

Companies that take advantage of technology may not only find cost-savings as an incentive, but also make risky jobs much safer by utilizing technology and machinery instead of people.

Leaders who drive digital transformation will have a significant impact on establishing their companies as trusted corporate leaders who are committed to making the world a better place.

And this combination will be key for the future of the mining and metals industry.

This article was originally published in the Mining Journal. View the original article here.

Topics Related to this Article

Digital

Industrial

Disruption

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top