Private Companies "Changes to the Governance Landscape" Dinner - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Financial ServicesPrivate Companies “Changes to the Governance Landscape” Dinner

London 2018

July 2018

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Ahead of the Wates review of Private Company Governance, Egon Zehnder London recently hosted a dinner with seven Chairman and Senior Directors of private companies to collect their thoughts and reactions as to whether privately held companies should strengthen and adapt their code of Governance. Overall, there was strong support to reinforce and further codify the governance of privately held companies.

We wanted to share some of the key themes and highlights that arose.

Support for reviewing the current framework

It was acknowledged that private companies constitute a very broad bucket, there is not a one-size-fits-all solution. In general everyone agreed that a framework is helpful, but that not everyone will enforce the code in the same way. Non-compliance may occur in certain circumstances and companies should be accountable for explaining their reasons and feel empowered to confess. Transparency will be key.

It is important to understand what shareholders want, it isn’t always ‘strategy & insights’. Perhaps it is necessary for private companies to extend the concept of moving beyond value creation for shareholders and towards a broader value creation and protection for all stakeholders.

The major difference between plc and private companies appears to be how they communicate. The burden of communication on PLCs is very different to private companies. Private companies do not need to justify short-term results and therefore are freer to think about other business considerations. It was noted that in Financial Services the regulation already seems cumbersome and akin to PLC governance.

Size and Ownership Structure

Whether the company is family-owned, a mutual, PE-backed or another structure, what matters is longevity of ownership, consistency in the business strategy and phenomenal customer services. However, the burden on a small start-up should not be the same as an established mid-sized business.  The cut-off around 2,000 employees seemed a reasonable threshold to delineate the requirement for greater transparency, accountability and independence.

Purpose of the Board of Private Companies

Some imagine a private board almost as a board of trustees. There was a feeling, however, that there is a broader structural problem because not all institutions want to engage with businesses (public or private). Fund managers appear to have a lower regard for corporate governance. On the whole PE are better at engaging, normally because two PE representatives tend to sit on the board.

How involved do family run companies want to be with the governance dialogue?

There is often a sense that family companies can ‘portray the image of conforming on corporate governance’. The difficulty with family–run businesses appears to be identifying what the owner actually wants, either because it isn’t clear or because it changes. This means there is greater emphasis on the role of independent non-executive directors who need to be prepared to speak out or even blow the whistle if necessary.

There’s a challenge to attract top talent to private businesses, it’s important to have ‘purpose’ and ‘clarity’

Sometimes there is a miscommunication and candidates are hired under a different pretence to that which the owners actually intended. Therefore once in role, this can limit the ability of the incumbent to think strategically and act in the best interests of the business. Communication throughout the process is critical to ensure all parties are aligned.

Download PDF

Topics Related to this Article

Finance

Board

Leadership

Communications

Disruption

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top