Egon Zehnder Cybersecurity Roundtable - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Cyber SecurityEgon Zehnder Cybersecurity Roundtable

July 2018

4 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Egon Zehnder recently held a Cybersecurity Roundtable Discussion in Hong Kong, moderated by Richard Lin and Matthew Edwards, consultants in our Technology Officers and Fintech practices. We were joined by Sean Duca, Chief Security Officer of Palo Alto Networks Asia, and by twelve CEOs, CIOs, and CISOs from leading financial services, telecommunications, consumer, transportation, and government organizations. We enjoyed an in-depth discussion and open exchange of ideas, insights, and best practices related to all things cybersecurity. We’ve shared some of the most significant takeaways below:

Cybersecurity awareness and education

Cyberattacks are growing in frequency, sophistication, and impact. Adding to the challenge are employees who are not cautious about cyberattack attempts and expose themselves to phishing, password theft, and other intrusions. Consequently, educating staff to increase awareness and vigilance is now crucial. In our discussion, panelists described some of the best practices they are employing at their companies, such as having regular training on data safety and running tests on employees through mock attacks. In some cases, the practice is taken so seriously that employees who repeatedly fail to respond appropriately to mock attacks are reprimanded and sometimes even terminated.

Intelligence sharing and its challenges

While panelists generally agreed that information-sharing on cyber attacks and their possible prevention is an important way to enhance defense measures across industries, it is clear that challenges remain. One clear observation was that the various perpetrators of cyberattacks are often more coordinated than the industries that are the targets of their attacks. This is because of competition between industry players and a fear of leaking news of attacks to the media.

Our participants pointed out that depending on how cooperative the board is, CEOs and CIOs may believe the short-term reputational risk in sharing information on attacks outweighs the potential long-term benefits of being more transparent. Trust can be especially hard to build among industry peers, particularly among  financial  intuitions  where  client  confidentiality is paramount. There was nonetheless general agreement that practitioners can and should do better in sharing information, and it was suggested that support through government regulation could help.

Raising management awareness of cybersecurity risks

Data protection ultimately helps businesses reduce risk. Compared to just a few years ago, there has clearly been a shift in the awareness of cybersecurity among C-level executives and boards. However, there are varying levels of understanding among organizations. Some attendees were sleeping well at night, knowing that effective investments and policies for cybersecurity were in place. Other attendees noted that CIOs still need to invest a significant portion of their time in raising awareness within their organizations so that the whole management team fully appreciates the importance of IT security, with appropriate budgeting and headcount.

Third-party service providers and contractors

Some companies may realize they cannot grow their in-house IT capabilities at the same pace at which the overall business grows. They are therefore using third-parties to supplement capabilities and control costs. This may result in data risks that are beyond the company’s control. While contracts and policies can be put in place to mitigate those risks, in reality there are challenges associated with maintaining appropriate cybersecurity standards through contractors. It is critical to establish trust—along with a sound legal framework.

Data protection measures

The pattern of attacks can be random in nature and initiated by individuals, groups, or nation-states. Apart from building up strong defenses, some companies have also taken proactive initiatives such as creating “honey pots” to lure hackers into their networks, all in an effort to better understand and learn from their strategies and therefore avoid future such attempts. Attendees shared examples of how cyberattacks could even result from an unflattering piece of public news that may encourage a disgruntled or activist cybercriminal to launch an attack.

CISO reporting line

This depends on the industry nature and business size. In some situations, the CIO is also the de facto CISO and reports directly to the CEO. This is especially common in the technology and financial industries where the need for high- level cybersecurity is more pronounced. In some other organizations, CIOs or CISOs may report to a COO or CFO, with a dotted line to the CEO. Still, other organizations emphasize the legal implications of cybersecurity with the CISO reporting into the General Council of Chief Legal Officer. Smaller businesses may combine the CIO, CISO, and CTO roles into one. What appears most important is for the CISO function to have a strong voice at the top of the organization as cybersecurity becomes a bigger issue requiring strategic rather than financial oversight.

Legal and regulatory framework

Hong Kong law does not require companies to share much information regarding cybersecurity, and relevant cybersecurity and IT infrastructure legislationisnotwellestablished. This is something that can be improved upon. Panelists agreed that a good example is Singapore, where the government and legislators have established a strong regulatory framework for cybersecurity.

Egon Zehnder's Take

While in most organizations, de-facto  cybersecurity  leadership  continues to be vested in the CIO organization, the CISO function has expanded well beyond the realm of just “Racks and Stacks.” To face increasingly complex cybersecurity challenges, a CIO or CISO must not only understand and address technology issues, but crucially must be a business leader who is highly effective at influencing the broader culture of the organization. As a result, our assessment of cybersecurity leadership talent increasingly focuses on those who can take a holistic approach to cybersecurity, treating it as a broader business issue that involves culture, practices, and people in addition to the technology. We therefore believe it is critical to look at the underlying drivers of curiosity, learning orientation, insightfulness, and engagement in selecting cybersecurity leaders for the challenge ahead.

Download PDF

Topics Related to this Article

CyberSecurity

Finance

Digital

Leadership

Communications

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top