Building Highly Effective Teams - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesBuilding Highly Effective Teams

August 2017

7 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Egon Zehnder’s Istanbul office recently convened a group of Turkey-based HR leaders from various sectors for a series of breakfast discussions focused on the importance of team building. Accompanied by the Office Leader Murat Yesildere’s presentation on “Building Highly Effective Leadership Teams”, the participants were very forthcoming creating an open dialogue where they shared their experiences and perspectives on team effectiveness. As one of the greatest benefits of working in a team is the inspiration and ideas that can result from team discussions, in this document, we are delighted to share a brief summary of what we heard.

Team effectiveness is a crucial theme in concurrent international HR today where many HR leaders are reaching out to capture the benefits of a strong cohesive team with right competencies. “The importance of work teams appears to be gaining in strength as jobs get bigger, organizational structures get more complex, and more and more companies become multi-national in scope (Naquin & Tynan, 2003).” Even though many multi-national corporate companies are aware that the team, not the individual holds the key to success, Turkish HR Leaders see that there is still a lot to be done to excel on the ideal combination of balance, efficiency, openness, alignment, resilience and energy.

This does not mean, however, that ambition is lacking. In order to increase team efficiency and drive growth for the business, there are strong motivations among Turkish HR leaders to integrate new initiatives into their field.

“Curiosity is one of the key aspects that forms the potential of an individual in any organization. That drive, that unstoppable urge to stretch, links individuals to their lifelong learning capacity, which is a major indicator of success both in and out of workplace. We should cultivate organizational curiosity where each individual strives to be a “Learn it all” instead of “ Know it all” as per quoted by Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella.”

Murat Yesildere
Office Manager at Egon Zehnder Istanbul

“Each team has a different motivational drive. The key is to determine what it is and set the goal accordingly. And to keep the collaboration in team, members should recognize that we all make mistakes. The important thing is how to overcome them and never give up as a team”

Tolga Görgülü
Human Resources Director at Oyak Renault

“We’ve been shifting the competency paradigm to the “strengths and potential view” which boost performance. In other words we are looking for and investing in people’s own best qualities, and try to compensate their less favorable sides, with others who are strong there. Additionally, the way we choose our words determines and alters our conception; a weakness may indeed be a strength in other circumstances. This approach helps the employee to utilize existing strong sides, understand his/her contribution to team and feels supported by an organization which understands his/her disposition, and improves performance.”

İdil Türkmenoğlu
Vice President of Human Resources, Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability at Boyner Group

Setting the Stage for Great Performances

The guests at our breakfast series all agreed that hiring the best talent in the market and building a team solely with these individuals does not amount to a “perfect” team. When looking at the six dimensions of team effectiveness, there is a misconception that for each individual, the higher the bar in each dimension, the better fit that person is. However determinant factor is the necessities and dynamics of the organization, which is subject to change. This leads companies to seek the solution on how to maximize the right competencies for different situations in a business environment that is in a constant state of flux. As Murat Yesildere elaborated on the six pillars of team effectiveness with real life examples, HR leaders also participated with their own experiences and situations they faced in their teams. The topics ranged from motivation, curiosity, performance to setting the right corporate culture.

“Even though we do not solely point out “women” when it comes to diversity, I cannot emphasize more the importance of fostering women presence in board level. I believe the only obstacle women have that hinders them from being successful is the glass ceiling they have created for themselves. This Team Effectiveness model is indeed eye-opening when taking decisions as a leader and will foster women to be more aware of their own skills.”

Elif Sezgin Di Sessa
Head of Human Resources Eurasia & Middle East at Sanofi

“In Xerox we used to operate on the Lean 6 Sigma model which is constructed on the idea of improving both individuals and processes. The tone, communication model of the board is set and we try to circulate this in every part of the corporation. The motto was “Make every connection matter”. We rewarded the mistakes and built a strongly connected team where the idea of team, not individual was always present.”

Ayşıl Akçanbaş
Human Resources Professional

When Teams Work Best: Embracing Diversity and Fostering Self-Realization

As all leaders agree, developing a high performing team align with corporate attributes takes time and effort. The teams who can steer their energy and sources collaboratively towards the same goal succeed. The point to which this energy & sources is correctly governed determines the success rate.

Diversity is also one of the aspects discussed. One way of fostering the diversity in the team is to demonstrate that individuals with diverse backgrounds have different perspectives on the same situation, which is a crucial factor to solve a problem.

Weak Link vs Strong Link Organizations

Having discussed all six dimensions (Alignment, Resilience, Energy, Balance, Openness and Efficiency) that build teams, Murat Yesildere also elaborated on the concepts of “weak and strong link” of teams (a concept introduced by Malcolm Gladwell). As an initial example, Yeşildere commented that football is a weak link game versus basketball being a strong link game. On a different dimension, in business world, professional services is a strong link game where rainmakers create value, difference and consequently are able to alter the result. On the contrary, in big sales organizations where the whole team has to contribute in order to deliver results instead of one rainmaker, we observe a weak link game. In a weak link game, team’s success depends on the performance level of the weakest member (link) in the team. The more organizations invest in weakest link(s), the higher teams’ performance grows.

Relative to this, the way we define the organization, as a weak or strong link organization, which can be altered depending on the dynamics of the industry, company and even the time, demonstrates the way we perceive and structure our teams in the first place. So it is an important starting point to answer the question every leader should ask themselves, whether they play a weak or strong link game in their organization.

Today, the world is moving towards a stage where many companies embody a weak link structure, inside which each and every team members’ contribution is increasing in various aspects and altogether, as a team, they deliver the results. Therefore it is vital for the senior executive team to maximize the effectiveness of teams in every organization structure.

“In order to achieve success, passion and eagerness should be present in each team member.”

Ahmet Ramiz
General Manager at Estee Lauder

“Looking at start-ups, we see an increased sense of accountability and owner mentality which indisputably adds to the speed, effectiveness and eventually success of the team. We strive to obtain the same mind-set in our big corporate environment which indeed requires a unique approach at defining teams.”

Birsen Çevik Akgünlü
Human Resources Senior Director at PepsiCo

“The motivation to create a success story, to which extent this passion is penetrating into each member defines success.”

Seda Kayrak Kızıltan
Human Resources Director at Flormar

“Because of the volatile environment in Turkey, openness has decreased and emphasis on efficiency has increased which certainly distorts the balance of the organizations. Energy flows into a wrong direction and I believe resilience is profoundly crucial at times like these.”

Cavidan Özdemir
Senior Human Resources Director at Adidas

“As our teams operate efficiently and deliver successful results, we tend to neglect the basis of what forms our team pyramid in the first place. Leaders should not cease to work on trust, engagement and energy of their teams.”

Ayla Cetinbora
Senior Director Human Resources and Quality at DHL

In Summary, the rapid development of new business models in the face of a global world requires new skills for both individuals and even more for the teams to succeed. To be able to configure the team, Team Effectiveness methodology offers a foundation for a dynamic talent management that is capable of delivering a new service and solutions model that will benefit both employees and the teams, consequently maximizing business results overall.

For more information contact:

Murat Yesildere
murat.yesildere@egonzehnder.com
+90 212 381 66 66

Building Highly Effective Teams
Download as PDF

Topics Related to this Article

Human Resources

Board

Leadership

Culture

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top