Tomorrow’s Healthcare Leaders Must be Different - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

HealthTomorrow’s Healthcare Leaders Must be Different

Building Future Health System Executives

July 2017

6 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Feature in Becker’s Hospital Review (June 2017)

Building Future Health System Executives

Disruption in healthcare will continue to be profound, widespread and unpredictable, regardless of what ultimately happens with the Affordable Care Act, or the recently introduced American Health Care Act of 2017. Despite unprecedented efforts by all players in the industry to lower costs and improve quality, healthcare spending in the U.S. hit $3.2 trillion in 2015, an increase of 5.8 percent from the year before.

As retirement approaches for many of the most influential leaders in the industry, Americans are living longer and using far more healthcare. According to the CDC, the average life expectancy for a 65-year-old American has increased by about 35 percent since Medicare was implemented in 1965.

The other half of the story is the explosive and costly developments in medical science. Today there are exponentially more things a provider can do for patients, and accepted standards of care for the same diagnosis can vary in cost by a factor of 100.

A New World for Health System Leaders

These changes are exerting pressure on large health systems from every direction. As a result, the skills required to lead these organizations are different and vastly more complex than they have ever been. As the industry consolidates, health system CEOs manage larger, more geographically dispersed and diversified enterprises. Today’s healthcare leaders must deploy capital across a vast array of possibilities, shifting from a fixed asset view to a portfolio view. They need to increasingly acquire, merge with or form tightly orchestrated business alliances with physician groups, insurers/risk managers, and numerous other players.

To achieve these mandates and compete for healthcare consumers, providers are expected to use data to predict the need for and plan care, and demonstrate quality and value after delivery.

“An important trait we are looking for in future leaders is comfort with uncertainty because this industry is changing so fast,” says Anthony Tersigni, President and Chief Executive Officer of Ascension. “Leaders need to make predictions about the future and communicate that vision to associates in a way that moves them toward it.”

The Leadership Skills Required to Survive

As the healthcare industry transforms, it creates a growing a talent void. The skills of many experienced executives are no longer suited to the current industry dynamics. The best competitors are scrambling to attract the scarce “new model” leaders within the industry, recruit from outside the industry where possible and accelerate the development of their internal high-potential executives.

“There is an ‘industrial revolution’ going on in healthcare. The environment, market and regulatory realities and the executive tool kit needed to manage are all being dramatically disrupted,” says George Halvorson, the former CEO and Chairman of Kaiser Permanente. “The key attribute of executive healthcare leaders in the future will be the ability to understand and anticipate change; and to shape change if you have that opportunity.”

There are models for healthcare leaders to use as guides for success. The automotive, consumer electronics, utility and telecom industries have all undergone major disruptions due to competitive shifts and deregulation. As will be the case in healthcare, the winning organizations in these industries were those whose leaders were able to change and adapt to a new market reality.

Egon Zehnder has worked with many of the world’s leading health systems to create high quality executive development and succession planning processes. In addition to our own expertise, we recently spoke with executive leaders from a range of top health systems to learn how they are developing their high-potential talent and creating effective succession plans.

Based on these conversations and research, four critical themes have emerged as requirements for success:

1. CEOs Must Drive Leadership Development and Succession.
The most effective CEOs leverage HR and talent management teams for program development and process management, but they hold themselves personally accountable for succession planning.

“I owned succession planning as the CEO. The board held me accountable and I held my executive team accountable,” says George Halvorson. “At the officer level you could not receive your annual appraisal if you did not have three potential successors on an explicit development path.”

2. CEO leadership is the single strongest predictor of success.
Without careful preparation and ongoing leadership from the CEO, critical succession decisions can expose misalignment on the board and among management. In addition, effective CEOs invest personal time in mentoring high-potential executives across the organization, participating in the programmatic leadership development efforts of the organization in meaningful, visible ways.

Organizations Must Understand, Develop and Promote the Traits and Skills that Predict Leadership Success. CEOs and boards must clearly articulate the skills needed to deliver on the organization’s strategy. In the best organizations, this is a finite list of skills and leadership competencies that are well-defined and broadly applied.

“We use the same criteria for internal promotion and external recruiting. In a perfect world, assessments are completed before a candidate meets the hiring manager. We use a psychometric tool and also assess for mission orientation. These two dimensions are accurate predictors of strengths and weaknesses and potential for success that you often don’t see in an interview,” says the Chief Human Resources Officer for a $5 billion health system.

“At our organization, the competency model has not changed but the emphasis has,” says Cathy Fraser, the Chief Human Resources Officer at the Mayo Clinic. “In the current environment, we are more concerned about business acumen and external orientation.”

3. A Formal Succession Process is Required.
“If you start the process a year before an executive retires, it is replacement planning, not succession planning,” says Herb Vallier, the Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer at Ascension. “There is not enough time in one year to develop someone to a new level.”

Leading organizations commit to regular review—annually, and occasionally more frequently—for the CEO, board, and key stakeholders to review and discuss the organization’s succession pipeline. This formal process means keeping job descriptions current, training leaders in assessment and feedback, creating development and review plans for key executives, and measuring development against established goals.

4. Winners Invest Substantially in High-Potential Talent.
Effective organizations draft high-potential employees into development cohorts as soon as they are recognized. These organizations create a culture of comfortable transparency about identifying these executives. They have the sensing capabilities through their succession- planning processes to identify significant talent gaps. This also alerts them to the need to go outside for talent years before a critical vacancy arises.

Development opportunities for high potentials give them breadth and depth tailored to their development needs. These are primarily based on role assignments and expansions of accountability. “Today we have more and more system roles and fewer and fewer hospital roles by design. We have reorganized several times in the past few years to create roles with broader scope and to give hospital-based executives enterprise projects to lead,” says David Blom, the President and CEO of OhioHealth. “We need to develop executives with strategy and physician relationship aptitudes.”

Finally, high potentials should have executive sponsorship and exposure. Senior leaders get to know them and their abilities by working directly with them on the critical problems of the business. At Mission Health, they are addressing this by creating new synthetic positions with
the title Chief. “These positions sit above Vice Presidents in scope and responsibility and at times may be intentionally ambiguous,” says Dr. Ronald Paulus, the President and CEO of the health system headquartered in Asheville, North Carolina. “They are purposely designed to aggregate responsibilities and give future leaders the learning opportunity of larger, more complex and diverse roles to prepare them for the next phase of their career.”

What Health System Leaders Must Do Now

While the stand-alone acute care segment of the industry declines, large health systems increasingly control the most important and expensive segments of US healthcare delivery. With balance sheets and access to capital that much of the fragmented industry does not have, health systems have the most to gain in today’s market, but also the most to lose.

Success requires managing the traditional business at unprecedented levels of quality and efficiency. Increasingly, additional value will be generated from new services, knowledge of overlapping sectors, data analytics and technology, consumer services, risk management and many other areas.

The leadership traits required to succeed have shifted dramatically from faithful stewardship to informed risk taking in an uncertain environment. In this extraordinarily complex world, health system leaders must quickly embrace a new role as market makers.

Story published in Becker's Hospital Review.

Topics Related to this Article

Health

Leadership

Disruption

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top