Attending to the Runners-Up: Creating More Inclusive CEO Successions - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Attending to the Runners-Up: Creating More Inclusive CEO Successions

April 2025

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Under the best of circumstances, CEO succession can be a weighty and organizationally uprooting process. Even the boards of companies with well-established approaches are doing their best to cope with the magnitude of uncertainty today and to create a process that is as inclusive and thorough as it can be. What is often a large concern is the retention of internal contenders for the role who will not ultimately be selected as the next CEO. Still, while this goal is frequently voiced upfront, we find that a careful understanding of the effects of the process on the runners-up is commonly neglected. Boards are often solving for the CEO when they need to solve for the CEO succession—to remember, as the process evolves, that they are not just appointing one person; they are building a new team constellation. It is essential to act upon the idea that the organization’s ongoing success is intricately linked to the experiences of all the candidates involved in the succession process and to recognize that prioritizing their futures and offering ongoing support will be beneficial to all.

The Status Quo

While retention rates for CEO succession runners-up are not widely disclosed, it is common for them to depart the organization after being passed over. Typically, a few different scenarios can take place. Some will reject the outcome as well as ongoing development/coaching and leave for other external posts. Some will even become CEOs elsewhere. Others do stay but, if not well integrated and supported proactively throughout the transition, they may not continue to grow, and opportunity is lost for all.

The propensity for candidates to leave underscores the importance of creating more professionally enhancing opportunities for these aspirational leaders during the process and beyond. Equally important is the need to ensure more transparent communication throughout the succession process, to not only keep it from becoming a “horse race,” but also so that participants are not blindsided by the outcomes.

What we have seen repeatedly is that runners-up who have both respect for the process and for the decision are more likely not only to be retained, but to advance as leaders and team members based on their participation and ongoing development. Again, this makes it so important to clearly articulate the reasons for the selection decision and to thoroughly discuss future opportunities for growth within the organization.

Creating a More Inclusive, Rewarding Process

Having worked on a substantive amount of CEO successions over the years, we strongly believe that this process should be made more organic and less crushing, where runners up can actively turn their experiences into knowledge and enlightenment as future leaders. This starts by creating a thoughtfully conceived process with careful attention to the thorough development plans for all the contenders—so that they can all move forward as more informed, better exposed and, overall, more self-aware leaders and team members. For whatever reason these individuals were not selected, most organizations still need these talented leaders in their C-suite lending their expertise and support to the new transition and as part of the emerging team constellation. Ongoing connection and support, coaching, and development are the logical steps to continuing to make the runners-up feel supported and integrated into the organization’s new chapter.

Here are a few suggestions as to how companies can begin to rethink their approach:

Shift the focus from replacement to development. Really highlight the goal of developing a pipeline of capable leaders and potential partners to the future CEO (rather than narrowly looking just for the top spot). Position the process as helping in building skills, expanding experiences, and strengthening leadership depth and self- mastery, beyond simply “fitting” the CEO specifications. The benefits of this approach to the entire organization are countless, most evidently in the [re]creation of a potentially new executive leadership team emboldened and future ready as a new transition begins.

Offer ongoing coaching and regular feedback throughout the succession process and afterwards. Encourage these leaders, who so often have just experienced in their development significant advances in self-awareness, to keep it up with their ongoing growth and identity enhancement. And demonstrate that you are invested in their progress. If this intention is made plain upfront, it can help shift the focus of the succession process from a win-lose mentality to one centered on holistic leadership development. This approach fosters an enriching experience for all participants and that can be integrated further after the decision. As you move from succession towards the transition, encourage the runners-up to reflect on key questions such as:

What insights have you gained about yourself during this journey?

What unexpected challenges did you encounter, and how can you address them?

How can you leverage this experience to build resilience and strengthen your core leadership abilities?
Above all, offer them ongoing support, development, and further coaching to keep following the learning and pursuing their leadership goals.

Develop tailored career paths that align with the executives’ aspirations and the company’s needs. Within these, assign significant leadership responsibilities that allow these individuals to have a meaningful impact on the company’s direction. For example, introduce cross-functional moves, strategic projects, and leadership rotations that can help runners-up see their role as integral to the transition as well as part their own ongoing growth.

In the end, all contenders not chosen as CEO will be disappointed. There is no avoiding this. Still, they are more likely to be retained if they understand the decision and (again) have grown to respect it and the process leading to it. When participants know that they grew and became better with this process and felt well informed throughout, they are more likely to be grateful for their participation and to remain open and willing to explore new futures, honing their roles and continuing their development journeys. It helps immensely, of course, if they feel fully supported by their organization and still have trust in its leaders. Then, if runners-up take full advantage of the process, they come out more self-aware, curious about the world and themselves, having gained a stronger leadership identity which can set them and their companies up for greater success down the road.

In a world that is changing so rapidly and is less “knowable” than ever, it makes good sense for organizations and succession candidates to take more advantage of the opportunities that the succession process presents to develop more capable, expanded leadership and team constellations for this era. For one thing, the redirection from replacement to development might help retain more succession contenders. Moreover, all will benefit from this attention to deeper identity development, because these are the leaders we need in abundance today. Whether ultimately chosen for an immediate CEO spot or not, underscoring this intentional journey for the ongoing growth of all the world’s next generation of great leaders is where our hope and progress will lie.

Explore more of our CEO Insights editions.

Get the Insights

Topics Related to this Article

Leadership Development

New CEO Models and Pathways

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top