General Counsel Roundtable – Hong Kong, Shanghai, Beijing - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Board Advisory ServicesGeneral Counsel Roundtable – Hong Kong, Shanghai, Beijing

The challenges and opportunities facing GCs in Greater China

December 2017

3 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

In April 2017 Egon Zehnder brought together a notable group of General Counsels and Legal/ Compliance Heads in Hong Kong, Shanghai and Beijing to discuss the challenges and opportunities facing GCs in Greater China. Several themes emerged during the roundtable events—themes that are relevant to any GCs in the region.

Talent: Retention of Millennials

Retaining high potential young talent inside the legal function is a huge challenge for all GCs. For starters, it is challenging to create a fast career progression in a typically flat legal function. Making things more complicated is the boom of local startups and aggressive PE & VC players in the Greater China market with the ability to lure away top legal talent.

Many of the GCs in our group are actively seeking advice on how to motivate and retain this generation. Millennials value training and development and they want to be seen and led as individuals. They tend to expect instantaneous and on-going recognition and rapid career progression. While some GCs stress the need for young legal professionals to learn the ropes through apprenticeship and discourage opportunistic career movers, others are experimenting with different leadership styles to connect with millennials and build an emotional bond with them.

At the meetings, GCs cited three strategies that they are using to develop and retain young legal talent:

Providing an increasing scope of responsibilities to develop junior team members

Providing opportunities to rotate to headquarters or other regions; moving millennials ‘around’ instead of ‘up’ to keep them from being bored

Creating an environment and culture of autonomy, empowerment and flexibility

Constant Disruption

Most GCs have mentioned that their companies are going through massive business transformation in Greater China, where e-commerce and the Internet of Things are revolutionizing market behaviors. Today’s legal counsels must commit time and resources to learn the various commercial and operational aspects of the enterprise and contribute to business discussions that go beyond traditional legal responsibilities, such as government affairs, corporate communications and global M&A.

China’s SOEs (State Owned Enterprises) and local Chinese firms involved in overseas M&A are seeking seasoned GCs and legal executives to advise their operations in foreign countries. This points to increasing demand for senior legal professionals in the next few years.

Cyber Security and Data Privacy

In our discussions, it was clear that the legal professions need to develop a proactive strategy and response to the emerging waves of risk and technology-driven change. GCs reported a concern about ambiguity in local laws and regulations around cybersecurity and data privacy - which is complicated further by the speed of change in the digital space. Some firms turn to local law firms who specialize in cybersecurity, while others leverage their global legal function to share knowledge and experiences. The ability to engage and influence local government on the development of more sophisticated legal systems and frameworks is an increasingly critical skill for GCs in China.

Compliance: Still Top of Mind

Some of the other themes discussed at the roundtables included anti-corruption efforts, compliance, reputation risk, heightened regulatory scrutiny and shareholder activism. In an increasingly VUCA world (volatile, uncertain, complex, ambiguous) that we are facing, GCs need to stay current on all the dynamic changes and ensure their legal & compliance teams are equipped to respond effectively.

Overall, compliance is still the most significant challenge for most GCs, and the scarcity of high caliber compliance talent keeps our GCs awake at night. An increasing demand for compliance professionals has been observed across all industries in major global markets including the US, Europe and the Middle East. The Asia-Pacific region is no exception.

Given the ambiguity of local laws, the ongoing development of regulations and legal systems, and heightened anti-corruption regulations, big corporations in Greater China need compliance officers with extensive experience and relevant degrees. Some GCs think of the compliance function as a potential career path for in-house lawyers. Indeed, the chief compliance officer role in large corporations could help legal professionals gain the experience necessary to land a General Counsel role in the future.

Topics Related to this Article

Board

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance

CyberSecurity

Disruption

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top