Selecting Your Digital Leader - Egon Zehnder

Skip to main content

Search for “”

... in Consultants

... in Offices

... in Services

... in Insights

Search all results

Our Services

Shaping Successions

CEO Successions

Executive Successions

Board Successions

Chair Successions

Committee Chair Successions

Advancing Governance

Board Review

Board Development

Board Advisory

Building Advisory Boards

Sustainability Board Advisory

Discovering Leaders

CEO Search

Executive Search

Board Search

Advisor Search

Executive Assessment

Developing Leadership

Individual Development

Accelerated Onboarding

Development Planning

Coaching

Team Journey

Unlocking Transformations

Transformational Development Programs

Chair and Board Potential

Executive Breakthrough

Executive Discovery

Transformational CHRO

Voyager

Customized Leadership Immersion

Explorer

Cultural Transformation

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Chief Executive Officers

Founders

Technology Officers

Chief AI, Data & Analytics Officers

Chief Information Officers

Chief Information Security Officers

Chief Product Officers

Chief Technology Officers

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

Consumer

Consumer Products

Media & Entertainment

Restaurants, Leisure and Hospitality

Retail, E-commerce, Apparel and Luxury

Sports

Financial Services

Asset Management

Banking and Markets

Digital Assets, Crypto, & Web 3

FinTech

Infrastructure

Insurance

Private Equity

Retail Financial Services

Risk Management

Sovereign Wealth Funds

Wealth Management

Health

Biopharmaceuticals

Healthcare Delivery & Services

Life Sciences Tools & Pharmaceutical Services

Medical Devices, Diagnostics and Technology

Industrial

Aerospace & Defense

Chemical & Process Industries

Energy

Machinery & Industrial Technology

Mining & Metals

Mobility & Automotive

Public & Social Sector

Arts, Culture & Sports

Economic, Social & Human Development

Education & Research

Environment & Sustainability

Interest Representation & Public Affairs

Public Administration

Public Finance

Public Health

Public Infrastructure

Services

Air Transport

Business Services

Hospitality, Travel & Leisure

Professional Services

Real Estate Services

Transportation & Logistics

Technology & AI

Artificial Intelligence

Communications & Connectivity

Cyber Security

Digital

Enterprise Tech

Internet of Things

Semiconductors

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

Functions

Industries

Meet our Consultants

Discover Insights

Find Offices

About Us

English

Change

Functions

Board Directors & Chairs

Chief Executive Officers

Inclusive Leadership

CFO & Audit Chair

Technology Officers

Marketing and Sales

Human Resources

Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Professionals

Communications & Public Affairs Officers

Supply Chain & Operations

Sustainability

Industries

Consumer

Financial Services

Health

Private Capital

Family Business Advisory

Industrial

Public & Social Sector

Services

Technology & AI

About Us

Our Board

Join Us

Newsroom

Impact for a Better World

Careers

English

Deutsch

中文

日本語

Digital TransformationSelecting Your Digital Leader

How smart talent choices will help drive your Digital Transformation

February 2018

5 mins read

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

“What are we doing about Digital Transformation?”

Boardrooms and executive committees across all industries struggle with this question. As leaders of organizations strive to adjust, they seek out all manner of digital change – everything from new revenue streams and customer engagement to new business models and operational capabilities. Still, many firms grapple with the first step: choosing the right Digital Leader. This leader will define or refine your digital vision, marshal resources, and guide the transformation of the organization. But the talent pool for this position is diverse and idiosyncratic by traditional HR standards. Finding and securing the right person is no easy task. To face this challenge, companies must resist the urge to chase the “hot” talent and skills that make the headlines. Instead, pursue a Digital Leader in a strategic way. There is no one-size-fits-all Digital Leader; however, there is a systematic way to approach this critical hire.

1. Identify Your Digital Strategic Priorities

As can be expected, these priorities will vary greatly by company. For example, some firms may be more focused on improved customer engagement, and others on new revenue streams or efficient workforce management. Many firms will have a combination of areas they want to address using digital tactics. Understanding and prioritizing your own digital strategy is the first step in seeking a Digital Leader. While there is a temptation to choose “all of the above,” there should be clarity on the key strategic areas you will ask a Digital Leader to address and prioritize.

2. Understand the Digital Leadership Archetypes

It’s important to look beyond just functional or technical skills, and to understand the broader outlook and orientation of the Digital leader. At one end of the spectrum are leaders who are “Business Model Innovators.” Broadly speaking, they focus more on the external, or marketfacing, manifestation of Digital Transformation. Their priorities will be customer and revenue oriented, and will involve product or service innovation and disruption. At the other end of the spectrum is the “Operational Agility Enabler.” This leader focuses on using technology to transform the company’s value chain - allowing for faster, more efficient and cost effective operationalcapabilities. Such a leader will focus on making internal processes and systems more suited to a rapidly evolving market through the implementation of simpler processes, the right digital standards and bimodal IT (managing both legacy and newer technology platforms seamlessly). In your search for a Digital Leader, where do your needs fall on the continuum? Even as you evaluate these differences, know that there are certain critical traits all Digital Leaders should demonstrate, regardless of their “flavor.”

All Digital Leaders share:

Strategic Vision and Market Insight. They can conceptualize and architect new user experiences; have insight into emerging trends.

Change Driver and Enabler Skills. They engage stakeholders in Digital Transformation; marshal resources and establish priorities.

Customer Passion. They seek to delight and inspire customers; design for customer, using data and trend sensing.

Data Centricity. They embrace analytics; seek data to inform strategy.

Agility. They are comfortable with ambiguity; demonstrate flexibility and curiosity.

3. Finding the Match

In order to help visualize the archetypes and develop a more granular view of the requirements for a Digital Leader, we have developed a Requirements Framework. In our experience, three key sets of criteria need to be addressed: Competencies, Experience and Characteristics, and Potential.

Competencies are behaviors that enable the desired set of organizational outcomes.

Experience and Personal Characteristics capture the business situations an individual has been through, and how these have shaped their personal preferences and work style.

Potential highlights markers that determine a person’s ability to grow and successfully respond to a changing environment.

Figure 1, below, shows these criteria in a visual framework.

Figure 2, demonstrates how a typical Business Model Innovator might differ from what one would look for in an Operational Agility Enabler. This framework provides a means to highlight the critical requirements of a Digital Leader for a specific business context and can serve as a blueprint for the ideal candidate. It also serves as an evaluation matrix to compare candidate capabilities against the set of defined requirements.

We have also found this framework useful in thinking about how best to complement the Digital Leader as they build up the rest of their team. Gaps in the capabilities of the leader can be addressed through carefully selecting the right people to support the leader – delivering a Digital Transformation team that is well - balanced and appropriately designed to address the strategic needs of the larger organization. Once you have defined your strategic goals, your search process moves forward. B e aware of hiring issues unique to the world of technology that you may encounter as you consider candidates. Top digital talent may not follow a traditional path to success in the business world. Great Digital Leaders are:

Often not inclined to leave Silicon Valley (or the corresponding tech hubs in other geographies). Consider location flexibility.

Younger and with emerging leadership skills. Do you offer appropriate leadership training?

In demand and may have CVs that seem “jumpy.” More frequent job changes are common in the digital ecosystem.

Often highly compensated with equity as a key component.

In all industries. The best talent may reside in an unusual place. There is no single path to this job.

There is an almost insatiable demand for digital talent. Nearly every sector is competing. The good news for companies is that digital talent is showing a good deal of cross-industry movement from technology companies to industrial companies and vice versa. The opportunities for a company outside of the technology field to attract top digital talent is expanding. The mandate for companies now is to conduct the search in a smart, strategic way – ensuring that the new Digital Leader will be the best pick for the transformation ahead.

Download the PDF:

Topics Related to this Article

Digital

Leadership

Share

Share on LinkedIn

Share via Email

Download the PDF

Written by

Stay up to date with our latest insights.

Subscribe now

Changing language

You are switching to an alternate language version of the Egon Zehnder website. The page you are currently on does not have a translated version. If you continue, you will be taken to the alternate language home page.

Continue to the                 website

Back to top