How interim talent is delivering transformation for UK businesses in 2026 | Perspectives | Heidrick & Struggles

How interim talent is delivering transformation for UK businesses in 2026

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

On-Demand Talent How interim talent is delivering transformation for UK businesses in 2026

Learn when and how UK organizations deploy interim leaders and independent specialists to accelerate high-stakes transformation in 2026.

M. E. Reidy

May 21, 2026
6m to read

In the UK, every C-suite, every leadership role, and every individual leader now carry a transformation mandate. But with the word overused and stretching thin, what does transformation really mean in 2026? The context shaped by AI adoption advancing from pilots to production; rising regulator and listed-company scrutiny; tighter capital and persistent cost pressure—all driving a need for rapid, multi-level shifts in core business operations.

Across industries, companies are simultaneously engaged in multiple transformations and transactions, reworking systems, operations, teams, and portfolios under the dual stressors of lean internal capacity and the demand for quick execution. Organizations are being challenged to find the expertise that can enact ‘break the glass’ transformations.

Heidrick & Struggles’ 2026 High-End Independent Talent Report highlights the role played by external talent in meeting this need, with interim leaders and experts increasingly being utilized to achieve critical outcomes. By layering internal teams with independent specialists, organizations are able to execute transformations in high-risk, time-scarce environments.

How transformation is manifesting in 2026

With organizational transformation in the UK spanning technology and data, operating models and governance, portfolio and capital, and people and culture, the defining feature of 2026 is that these dimensions are all shifting together rather than sequentially. Every transformation is now multi-dimensional and time-boxed.

While no two transformation agendas look alike, they are all woven from the same threads, displaying repeating motifs. We see four key patterns emerging.

• The delivery model is changing. The most consistent pattern is not what UK companies are transforming, but how and with whom. Team layering sees internal leadership owning outcomes, consultancy firms shaping thinking, and interim leaders and experts executing strategy. This could take the shape of building the PMO, leading the operating-model redesign, standing up a function, or running the finance transformation, among many other use cases.

The skill mix UK firms select offers a read on how they are deploying high-end independent talent to run the business with greater discipline and build what comes next. The most requested skills span finance, FP&A, project management, and PMO leadership, alongside strategy, technology, and transformation capabilities

• Concurrent transformations are making governance a scarce asset. Organizations are running multiple transformations, comprising hundreds of individual activities, with transformation offices being founded from scratch, PMOs rebuilt, and steering cadences redesigned. In these complex scenarios, the governance infrastructure and leadership needed to hold it all together is in short supply.

• Regulation and portfolio moves are raising the bar on rigor. External forces are pushing transformation across all sectors. Pressures include regulatory change, listed-company expectations such as IPO readiness, and portfolio restructuring including carve-outs and bolt-on M&As. Transaction-related requests grew 54% YOY—and M&A-specific project demand increased 60%—reflecting continued need for flexible expertise in integrations, carve-outs, and other high-stakes deal activity.

Each factor raises the bar on financial controls, planning discipline, investor-grade reporting and operating-model clarity. Heidrick and Struggles’ 2026 independent talent research shows finance as the most requested interim leadership function by far—accounting for 51% of all interim leadership requests—underscoring the central role finance leaders play in periods of uncertainty and change.

• Technology is the trigger, but people are deciding outcomes. Whether the headline transformation is a core platform build, an AI-native development lifecycle, a cloud-based calculation engine, or a CRM and data overhaul, the hard yards in tech transformation are being done in the people processes: change management, internal communications, and upskilling.

AI is being inserted in operational models, but teams’ trust in new ways of working is lagging. This is the issue most likely to derail a transformation program, and the one internal teams are least equipped for, because it requires a challenging combination of pace, leadership neutrality, and pinpoint communication to win those hearts and minds.

Incorporating interim talent

In this transformation environment, on-demand talent is a powerful resource for UK businesses. Interim leaders can drive non-partisan change from the top down. Not simply a stopgap solution, they are being deployed strategically to manage disruption, lead complex transformations, and address succession challenges. Nearly a quarter of all requests for interim leaders link directly to transformation initiatives, and demand for PMO and other transformative functions is up 37% year-over-year.

With technology driving transformation, interim digital, data, and IT leadership appointments are up 58% since 2023. These leaders increasingly arrive AI-enabled, with Heidrick & Struggles’ 2026 Talent Lens showing that 89% actively employ it across a variety of tasks, compressing the time between their arrival and impact. And requirements for AI literacy aren’t restricted to digital departments: 25% of requests across all business functions are related to digital, data and AI.

Alongside a digital focus, businesses are prioritizing growth and commercial execution, with a 33% increase YOY in requests for interim marketing and sales leaders. Human capital expertise is also in high demand, increasing 129% YOY, with organizational change requiring workforce planning and talent strategies.

Best practices in meeting a transformation mandate with interim talent

In partnering with clients across sectors to place interim leaders and experts, we’ve identified the following core principles:

• Layering: Build transformation teams around the layer each talent type solves best. A blended model should be the default: internal leaders own the mandate, strategy firms shape the plan, and on-demand independents drive execution. By combining interim leaders and experts with internal resources, organizations accelerate change and build lasting capability.

• Practicality: Define the practical reasons independents should be part of the transformation plan from day one: speed to impact, objectivity, niche skill fit, flexible capacity, or supporting AI-enabled execution.

• Capability: Engagements should be shaped around outcomes not headcount, with an explicit end-state and external-to-internal handover built in. This requires that organizations scope for the target-state capability, not the transformation activity.

About the author

M.E. Reidy (mreidy@heidrick.com) is a partner focused on interim solutions in the UK and Europe; she is based in the London office.

Related content

2026 High-End Independent Talent Report

Report

Making transformation stick: Using interim leaders to turn ambition into execution

Laura J. Klein

Laura J. Klein

10m to read Article

The missing middle: Why interim talent is the vital layer between hiring and consulting  in the UK

Olly Hampson

Olly Hampson

5m to read Article

Leadership assurance: Using flexible workforce strategies to fill leadership and capability gaps

Sunny Ackerman

Sunny Ackerman

9m to read Article

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings