Supply chain leadership in Europe: Where are the women? | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Supply chain leadership in Europe: Where are the women?

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Supply Chain & Operations Officers Supply chain leadership in Europe: Where are the women?

Based on our own work and discussion with 12 female leaders in European supply chain functions, we recommend leaders reflect on three questions as they seek to improve gender balance among their supply chain leaders.

Camilla Gilone

Read the full article

Historically, leadership teams of the supply chain function have been male dominated, even more so than many other functions. This is not in the least because of old-fashioned gender stereotypes that funneled women in the function through roles that were less likely to propel them into leadership positions.

But recently there has been a steady increase in representation of women across most levels of supply chain leadership, according to recent Gartner research.1 The share of women in mid-pipeline roles such as directors and senior managers has slowly increased over the past five years, reaching 30% and 28% within each role, respectively. This means that companies are more and more able to tap women into their senior leadership succession planning.

The supply chain function has the lowest share of women in leadership roles

At Europe’s top 500 companies by revenue, as of May 2023, 172 have chief supply chain officers and only 22 (13%) are women. This makes it the second-least diverse leadership role out of the seven we track, ahead only of the CEO role.

Representation varies greatly by sector and country: Industrial companies have the largest share of women in the chief supply chain officer role, at 16%, while consumer companies have the lowest, at 7%.

France has the highest share of women leading the supply chain function among Europe’s three largest markets, likely an outcome of its recent regulatory push for gender parity.2

Women are more often recruited externally than men for the chief supply chain officer role

The fact that women are more often external recruits than men suggests that companies have had trouble retaining mid-career women. Now that there are more in the supply chain leadership pipeline, this figure may well shift in the coming years.

Improving the gender balance in the supply chain function

Companies are pursuing gender diversity for many reasons, but it is notable that some recent research suggests that women could have an advantage in supply chain roles because they proved to be more collaborative than men in the role of both buying agent and supply agent. In addition, their collaborative behavior had a more positive impact on the people they worked with. Indeed, supply chain leadership teams made up of only women outperformed teams of any other composition when it came to efficiency.3

Women are re-evaluating the value they derive from work. In the supply chain function particularly, Gartner also found that companies find retaining mid-career women increasingly challenging and that the most frequent reasons for leaving their supply chain jobs are career advancement and compensation.4 That makes a focus on retention particularly important.

The good news is that our own work has shown that while technical skills are a prerequisite foundation to becoming a supply chain leader, collaboration as a part of a leadership capabilities matrix is more valued in supply chain leaders.5 The succession talent pool can therefore be opened to people with less supply chain–specific experience but with the capabilities to lead increasingly complex supply chain operations. And that, in turn, should put more women in the supply chain leadership planning pool.

Based on our own work and discussion with 12 female leaders in European supply chain functions, leaders will benefit from reflecting on these three questions as they seek to improve the gender balance among their supply chain leaders:

Does your supply chain function guide women and men through the same career paths and opportunities?

One of the pitfalls of many companies’ strategy is the fact that they put a lot of effort and resource on recruitment and fail to invest sufficient efforts in retention and career development. Organizations that have gender balance at all levels will be more attractive to women. Leaders should examine their current supply chain leadership team and leadership succession pipeline and understand the critical imbalances and main pain points in female retention.

Companies should also make sure the leadership career paths are transparent and everyone understands what roles more often lead to leadership positions. Quite frequently, the women leaders we spoke to pointed toward needing paths earlier in their career that include building specialized skills complemented by management and leadership capabilities, rather than general management. That is because women are more often women channeled through general management roles such as planning and project management, which are less likely to lead to a leadership position.

Does your organization foster an inclusive culture where women feel psychologically safe?
Many of the female leaders we talked to indicated that their key challenge was an uneven playing field where they had to spend additional time and energy to build credibility to be taken seriously while their male colleagues were focusing on delivery. Though many women talk about needing equal opportunities, it is also clear that opportunities aren’t enough: some of their feedback consistently talks about “growing thicker skin” or “learning how to use laughter as a deflection tool.” Women will not join or stay in environments where they cannot thrive.

Does your organization support all top talent equitably?
Research shows time and time again that women still carry the larger load in their families and communities; organizations that want to improve their gender balance should therefore pay particular attention to what helps women excel, from flexible work arrangements to access to the right sponsors, coaches, and mentors, as well as stretch assignments.

Organizations should also consider step-up talent to tap early into the growing mid-pipeline of women in supply chain. That requires focus on skills and potential rather than track record when looking for the next chief supply chain officer.

About the author

Camilla Gilone (cgilone@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles' London office and a member of the global Supply Chain & Operations Officers Practice.

References

1 “Gartner survey reveals increased representation of women in supply chain leadership roles,” Gartner, press release, May 19, 2022, gartner.com.

2 Companies in France are expected to set a target of 30% women in executive leadership by 2027, and of 40% by 2030.

3 Siqi Ma, Li Hao, John A. Aloysius, “Women are an Advantage in Supply Chain Collaboration and Efficiency,” Wiley Online Library, November 23, 2020, onlinelibrary.wiley.com.

4 “Gartner survey reveals increased representation of women in supply chain leadership roles,” Gartner, press release, May 19, 2022, gartner.com.

5 Camilla Gilone and Fabrice Lebecq, “Resetting the role of the chief procurement officer,” Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

Inclusive Leadership

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Related Content

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain, 3M

Heidrick & Struggles’ Alasdair Spink speaks with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain at 3M, on the key skills and leadership capabilities chief supply chain officers need to become future-ready.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Supply-chain officer focus: The strategic value of succession planning

Many organizations where the supply chain is crucial to operations have been elevating the strategic importance of their chief supply chain officers. But talent is scarce, and succession planning is taking on new urgency. Interviews with 30 supply chain leaders suggest three key elements of improvement.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Managing the semiconductor trilemma: A conversation with Dr. Roawen Chen, chief supply chain and operations officer at Qualcomm

Dr. Roawen Chen shares the leadership capabilities critical to managing the three competing KPIs of the semiconductor industry: pursuing the most advanced technology, having the lowest cost, and having unlimited supply.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

How AI is delivering value in an integrated supply chain: A conversation with James Borzi, EVP and chief supply chain officer at Baxter International

James Borzi shares how he sees AI continuing to optimize the healthcare supply chain; and what it means to him as a leader to lead in an AI-enabled world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings