CEO and board succession in the age of impact

Identified Country:

CEO and board succession in the age of impact
Explore this page To read the full article, download the PDF.Related Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

CEO Succession Planning CEO and board succession in the age of impact

New approaches to recruitment and selection, evaluation, and replacement are emerging as boards explore their new responsibilities. Turnover, both voluntary and involuntary, is expected, and boards need to be ready.

Jeremy Hanson, Tim Gallagher

To read the full article, download the PDF.

The world is changing and with it, the role of business. Against the backdrop of eroding democratic norms and increased polarization, institutions are struggling to meet society’s needs on a vast set of social, environmental, and geopolitical issues that impact regional and global stability. Trust in government to address these needs is at historic lows around the world and dropping, while trust in business to do so appears to be growing.

A new concept of the corporation is being formed on the back of this trust, one that bleeds into the realm of public service. Governed well, this expanding license to operate can help business address many of society’s most pressing concerns and drive sustainable financial returns. We were given a glimpse of this expanded corporate concept during the COVID-19 pandemic and again in the Russia/Ukraine conflict. As we emerge from the pandemic and wrestle with the role of business in geopolitical settings, boards are trying to make sense of the path ahead, their role, and the trends that are driving this conversation. In planning for the future, our clients are paying specific attention to succession: their own and that of the CEO and board of directors.

New approaches to recruitment and selection, evaluation, development, and replacement are emerging as boards explore the boundaries of their increasing responsibilities. In 2022, we saw an unprecedented rise in the number of boards engaging us to conduct multi-year “board mapping” exercises. Think of this as an insurance policy: as the standards for performance change, boards are expecting turnover, both voluntary and involuntary, and they want to be ready. We know that the board’s agenda is growing, and that frequency of deliberation is increasing. A lack of clarity contributes to exhaustion. In that light, our observations are designed to provide clarity on the trends affecting CEO and board succession and the specific steps we continue to see boards taking to lower risk and build confidence in this new environment.

To read the full article, download the PDF.

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top US 2026 | Closing the CEO capability gap

Fortune 500 companies are increasingly appointing new CEOs who have prior experience in the role. However, a new survey finds that more than a third of US companies still don’t have a CEO with the capabilities the company needs to succeed in the near term. Some companies are planning their CEO successions more comprehensively and seeing greater success.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on sitting CEOs at the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings