Board Monitor Europe 2024: Six shifts boards are making to thrive now | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Board Monitor Europe 2024: Six shifts boards are making to thrive now

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Boards & Governance Board Monitor Europe 2024: Six shifts boards are making to thrive now

Heidrick & Struggles’ Board Monitor Europe 2024 report explores six ways boards, and specifically European boards, are reshaping their processes to thrive now.
September 25, 2024

Heidrick & Struggles

View the data on the newest class of directors added to the boards of companies in major markets around the world

For a more in-depth look at board appointment trends in European markets, please choose a country:

Board Monitor Belgium

Board Monitor Denmark

Board Monitor Finland

Board Monitor France

Board Monitor Germany

Board Monitor Ireland

Board Monitor Italy

Board Monitor Netherlands

Board Monitor Norway

Board Monitor Poland

Board Monitor Portugal

Board Monitor Spain

Board Monitor Sweden

Board Monitor Switzerland

As the role of the board is expanding, with more being expected of directors in the context of increasingly uncertain times, we are exploring the implications in the way boards operate and evolve. How is the role of business in society changing? What are the implications for directors? What does the future hold?

Around the globe, boards are tackling geopolitical uncertainty and conflict, emerging technologies, cybersecurity concerns, and a long list of social and environmental concerns. In Europe1, directors also face an ever-increasing regulatory burden and a closer continuous threat from geopolitical conflicts that have risen on the agenda of European governments.

But this expanded role is also creating opportunity for boards. New approaches are emerging for boards and individual directors who see promise in this shifting landscape. In what follows, we draw on the results of two recent surveys of CEOs and directors around the world, and our experience, to describe how directors and CEOs are answering six questions that are reshaping the boardroom.

Six questions reshaping the boardroom

Who is influencing the board agenda today—and are board members happy with that?
Where does the board spend its time—and are those the right places?
How are boards addressing the widening risk environment?
Are boards more operationally involved?
How should boards engage with the workforce?
How are boards thinking about diversity today?

Who is influencing the board agenda today—and are board members happy with that?

To better understand the relative influence of stakeholders today, we asked directors and CEOs to stipulate which stakeholders have accelerated their influence most in the post-Covid environment. Overall, they report that the CEO and leadership team, the broader workforce, regulators, and consumers and customers have increased their influence more than others.

Regulators top the list of stakeholders whose influence has increased since the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic in Europe, with 52% of directors reporting increased influence in the same timeframe, compared to a 45% global average. Though boards are paying attention to the role of activists, we saw a relatively small number of European respondents reporting report increased influence from mainstream investors (22%) or from activist investors (12%), consistent with the global average.

Where does the board spend its time—and are those the right places?

Europe follows the broad global agreement among both CEOs and directors that the board meeting agenda remains primarily focused on traditional board oversight responsibilities (financial performance and risk, stockholder concerns, and strategy reviews, for example) and traditional board leadership responsibilities (CEO succession planning and leadership performance and compensation, for example). Together, these categories take up nearly 60% of boards’ time. External global risks, the opportunities and risks associated with technology (AI and cyber) and other stakeholder issues capture about 10% each in the balance of the meeting schedule.

Respondents in Europe far more often than their global peers report spending more time on geopolitical, sustainability, and environmental risks. Consistent with global findings though, the area that saw the greatest increase in time spent in the boardroom is emerging technology and AI.

How are boards addressing the widening risk environment?

When we asked what steps boards have taken since Covid began to better manage uncertainty and risk, we found that respondents remain anchored primarily in risk management practices that are internal in nature; that is, derived from interactions among the board itself and between the board and management. This is more pronounced for European boards, where respondents indicated to a lesser extent that they had exposure to external experts or had added risk experts to the board.

Are boards more operationally involved?

Both in Europe and globally, a majority of respondents report that board members are more operationally involved.  Only a quarter report that they have not crossed that line. When it comes to reasons for operational involvement, European respondents cite to a larger extent than their global peers the desire to learn more about operations than reporting allows. Notably, just over a quarter of our European respondents say they don’t trust the executive teams to get the work done.

How are boards engaging with the workforce?

Workers are increasingly exercising their influence on the board agenda. When we asked how boards should engage with the workforce, respondents in Europe showed a preference for participating in townhalls, receiving third party employee engagement surveys, and meeting small groups of employees without executives present.

Diversity among the newest directors

Each year, we analyze the new appointments to the boards of companies listed across Europe, including overall turnover, new directors’ former and current executive roles, and age, among other aspects of their backgrounds. For the full year of 2023, we saw a small uptick in the number of seats filled though a small downturn in the share of seats going to first-time directors. Overall, diversity trends remained steady. Click here for global data.

EU regulation requires that boards have at least 40% (and not exceeding 49%) of the underrepresented gender among non-executive directors or at least 33% (and not exceeding 49%) among all board members for listed companies by the end of June 2026.2

Progress toward that goal has been steady over recent years, with the share of seats going to women ranging from 43% to 49%. In 2023, 47% of seats went to women in Europe overall, and in six countries more than half of seats went to women.

When we look at age diversity, while the average age of newly seated directors has crept up since 2020, from 55 to 57, the range of ages goes from 28 to 79.

Recommendations

Increase stakeholder engagement
Cultivate a learning culture on the board
Expand sources of expertise
Increase investment in succession planning
Govern across boundaries
Leverage others

Acknowledgments

Heidrick & Struggles wishes to thank the following executives for sharing their insights. Their view are personal and do not necessarily represent those of the companies they are affiliated with: Mark Cutifani, chairman, Vale Base Metals; board member, Total Energies; former CEO, Anglo American Total, Anglo American; Colin Hunt, CEO, Allied Irish Bank; and Sonia Tatar, executive director, INSEAD Corporate Governance Centre.

Heidrick & Struggles also wishes to thank the following colleagues for their contributions to this article: Alice Breeden, Sam Burman, Carole Deffez, Sylvain Dhenin, Jenni Hibbert, Will Moynahan, Tobias Petri, Nicolas von Rosty, and Claire Skinner.

References

1 This year’s Board Monitor Europe tracks and analyzes trends in non-executive director appointments to the boards of the largest publicly listed companies in Belgium (BEL 20), Denmark (OMX Copenhagen 25), Finland (OMX Helsinki 25), France (CAC 40), Germany (DAX and MDAX), Ireland (ISEQ), Italy (FTSE MIB), the Netherlands (AEX), Norway (OBX), Poland (WIG20), Portugal (PSI 20), Spain (IBEX 35), Sweden (OMX Stockholm 30), and Switzerland (SMI Expanded).

2 "Directive (EU) 2022/2381 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 November 2022 on improving the gender balance among directors of listed companies and related measures,” EU-Lex, November 23, 2023.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

Inclusive Leadership

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings