CEO and board confidence monitor: A deep dive on the Middle East | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

CEO and board confidence monitor: A deep dive on the Middle East

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

CEO & Board of Directors CEO and board confidence monitor: A deep dive on the Middle East

A recent survey of 112 CEOs and board members in the Middle East highlights leaders’ concerns about leadership attraction, development, and planning.
May 12, 2024

Heidrick & Struggles

Leaders in the Middle East generally see the same topics as significant for their organizations as leaders in other regions: economic and geopolitical uncertainty and volatility as well as building and maintaining and healthy organizational culture are in the top five globally and in the region. However, leaders in the Middle East are more often concerned about leadership attraction, development, retention, leadership succession, and turnover.

And on those key issues, only around a third of leaders in the Middle East who are concerned are confident in their organization’s ability to manage them. They are even less confident on these issues than leaders around the world.

And although the region’s leaders have about the same level of confidence in how their leadership development strategy is positioning the organization for the future, a startling 12% have no confidence at all—double the global share.

These findings highlight the challenges leaders in the region are facing as they seek to develop more leadership talent at home while also being attractive to the best talent from around the world. Our work with clients suggests three steps boards can take to meet those challenges.

Strategic workforce planning for the future: Boards and leaders must engage at the top in terms of the organization’s strategic planning roadmap (ideally on a three-to-five-year horizon), skill sets for the future, and the plan to attract best-fit talent from the market and develop leaders from within the organization. Often, talent acquisition planning is limited to annual cycles. Therefore, shaping a rolling, forward-looking perspective is helpful in enabling the talent strategy—buy, build, borrow, and so on—to deliver the desired results in a timely manner.
Encouraging leaders’ learning and development: Boards can help organizations keep the focus on building internal capabilities via a systematic approach to leader development. Bringing succession planning discussions (at least up to two or three levels below the C-suite within an organization) as an agenda item to board-led committee discussions serves as a mechanism to allow for the visibility and development of current and emerging leaders. It also allows for a check on diversity and talent mobility. Regular assessments of leaders, review of individual and collective competency gaps, and plans to close those gaps for the future are encouraged as an ongoing discipline for organizations that focus on talent health.
Enabling a culture that attracts talent and is aligned to your organization’s business ambition: To ensure that leaders stay and positively contribute to an organization’s goals, it is critical that boards and the C-suite define and lead the cascade of culture within an organization. How leaders role model the desired culture and values of an organization influences how self-motivated individuals will be to perform within that environment.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Leadership Development

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top US 2026 | Closing the CEO capability gap

Fortune 500 companies are increasingly appointing new CEOs who have prior experience in the role. However, a new survey finds that more than a third of US companies still don’t have a CEO with the capabilities the company needs to succeed in the near term. Some companies are planning their CEO successions more comprehensively and seeing greater success.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings