2024 US Professional Services Partner Compensation Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2024 US Professional Services Partner Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Compensation Trends 2024 US Professional Services Partner Compensation Survey

Our second survey of professional services partners finds that firms have elevated the bar at both the staff and partner levels and have not had to pay the same premiums to retain talent.
June 6, 2024

Gustavo Alba ,
Liz Hayes ,
Adele Aviles

Welcome to the 2024 US Professional Services Partner Compensation Survey, our survey focused on professional services partners’ compensation, as well as their role structures, support ratio, and expectations.

For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled compensation and organization data from a survey of 187 partners in the professional services industry in the United States. We hope to expand the numbers and scope of respondents in future years.

We hope you enjoy reading the report. As always, suggestions are welcome, so please feel free to contact us—or your Heidrick & Struggles representative—with questions and comments.

Key findings

After a booming 2021 and 2022, the professional services industry market has slowed. Consulting firms—management and advisory, strategy, technology and IT—have all had to navigate choppier markets as interest rates rise and geopolitical volatility creates uncertainty. Firms have elevated the bar at both the staff and partner levels and have not had to pay the same premiums to retain talent.

Still, our survey respondents’ average outlook for their firm’s fiscal year compared to the previous fiscal year skews slightly optimistic. Through restructuring and performance improvements as well as glimmers of hope in value creation through AI, looking ahead, firms might consider what actions they can take now that may be countercyclical but will pay off later—investing in DE&I, for example.

Reported partner turnover was higher in 2024 compared to 2022: 49% of respondents said partner turnover was higher or significantly higher compared to their expectations at the beginning of the year; only 30% said the same in 2022.
In 2024, there was notably higher than expected turnover at technology and IT consulting firms.
Compared to 2022, in 2024, significantly more respondents said that their firm did not have to pay junior consultants notably more than in prior years.
Compared to 2022, in 2024, significantly fewer respondents said they’re paying a premium to attract or retain diverse consultants at any level.
Respondents’ average outlook for their firm’s fiscal year compared to the previous fiscal year skews slightly optimistic, with 44% who are optimistic.
When asked about their outlook for performance this financial year, respondents at the largest firms, those with more than $20 billion in revenue, were least often optimistic, and most often neutral. Those respondents at mid-cap companies were feeling more optimistic.
Regardless of respondents’ general outlook, interest rates and their impact on the economy, AI, and the US presidential election and geopolitical uncertainty are key factors for influencing respondents’ outlook.
Overall, 2023 average total cash compensation for partners at professional services firms was $672,000. Partners at strategy consulting firms saw the highest total cash compensation.

About the authors

Gustavo Alba (galba@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles Technology & Services Practice; he is based in the New York and Miami offices.

Liz Hayes (lhayes@heidrick.com) is a partner in the Technology & Services and Private Equity practices; she is based in the Chicago office.

Adele Aviles (aaviles@heidrick.com) is an engagement manager in the Technology & Services Practice; she is based in the Washington, DC, office.

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

Frontier Tech

2025 Global Chief Information Security Officer Compensation Survey

Our sixth annual global survey of CISOs reveals how CISOs’ pay, reporting lines, and AI mandates are evolving as cybersecurity becomes a CEO-level, enterprise-wide priority.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings