2023 Private Equity Compensation Survey | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2023 North American Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Private Equity 2023 North American Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles' annual survey of investment professionals in North America explores recent compensation data and trends across private equity.

Jonathan Goldstein ,
John Rubinetti

Read the full report

Welcome to our 2023 North American Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey. This report provides a comprehensive picture of the compensation that North American private equity executives are currently receiving.

For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled compensation data from a survey of 587 investment professionals in North America.

We hope you enjoy reading the survey, which remains the only one of its kind. As always, suggestions are welcome, so please feel free to contact us—or your Heidrick & Struggles representative—with questions and comments.

Executive summary

Investment professional hiring trends

After a busy few years, we have seen a slowdown in hiring in 2023. We are now seeing a large supply of high-caliber candidates, but significantly less demand overall.
Where there is demand:
It has increased for credit, special situations, and operating partner hires at private equity firms.
Despite the headlines about the technology and consumer sectors, both remained active in hiring investors.
Firms who we successful in raising capital in 2022 or 2023 now find themselves in an excellent position to bring on high-quality talent.

A lack of succession planning at many PE firms is leading to new firms being created, a trend we expect to continue.
Diverse candidates continue to be particularly sought after at all levels.

Compensation trends

Compensation trends remained relatively steady between 2022 and 2023, with more increase than decrease; moving into 2024, however, we expect compensation to flatline.
Bonuses are already under some threat: 11% of respondents reported a decrease in their bonus between 2021 and 2022, up from 6% who reported a decrease between 2020 and 2021.

State of the private equity market

After several years of growth, the private equity industry has started to reverse course this year as sustained higher interest rates, inflation, and more recently the threat of a government shutdown damped deal and exit activity.1

By the end of Q1 2023, quarterly exit value was down 75.1% from the peak in Q2 2021. Pitchbook further notes that quarterly exit activity is now well below the pre-Covid (2017 to 2019) median with no signs of bottoming, which indicates “that a new normal is firmly in place.”2 The Wall Street Journal reports that the value of exits in the third quarter fell almost 41% to $44.1 billion from the second quarter and was more than 80% lower than the peak reached in the second quarter of 2021, and the number of US exit deals fell about 46% in the third quarter from the comparable period a year earlier.3

Pitchbook also noted that, as of the end of June, US PE firms had completed an estimated 4,338 deals, with a cumulative estimated deal value of $418.3 billion. Deal count is still solidly ahead of pre-COVID levels, by 56.3%, but only marginally so by dollar value.4

Hiring trends

Overall, this year has seen a market that has flipped from candidate-driven to firm-driven. In 2021 and 2022, firms were growing and needed to recruit, creating an ultra-competitive talent market. Now, however, we are seeing a large supply of high-caliber candidates but significantly less demand.

In that context, the balance is shifting toward credit, operating, and special situation roles as firms focus on making sure their current portfolios are performing. In 2021 and 2022, there was a great deal of mid-level vice president and partner-level growth buyout work; this remains active, though less so. We also see more hiring at firms drawing on alternative sources of capital, as these firms have not faced the same fundraising issues as other firms.

There is still activity across every sector, except for traditional energy and exploration. Technology, particularly software, has been hit hard, and we are now seeing a tremendous amount of hiring activity due to firms changing strategies or replacing leaders.

Diversity, particularly gender diversity, continues to be top of mind for every firm. Firms have been successful in finding diverse candidates, but the talent pool of candidates from underrepresented communities is not necessarily growing; new candidates are not being brought into senior roles because industry leaders still want people who have prior PE experience. (That said, we do see diversity increasing at junior levels, which offers some hope for additional improvement in the future.)

Meanwhile, over the past five years, we have seen an increase in the number of first-time funds, many of which have been started because more junior partners feel that their firm’s founders are not creating a path for growth or creating meaningful leadership succession plans.

While our survey’s results show that there were no dramatic changes in compensation or how executives are paid, it is important to note that these studies are, by nature, backward-looking. Our sense for 2024 is that compensation will remain for the most part flat, with exceptions on both sides; though fundraising has been challenged, some funds have done well, and that will continue to be reflected in their high performers’ compensation.

Compensation trends

Overall, we have seen that firms that have historically underpaid their people have lost talent and have had to use the past few years to catch up. That said, the share of investment professionals who reported an increase in base pay decreased slightly: from 70% who saw an increase between 2021 and 2022 to 63% who saw an increase between 2022 and 2023.

The share reporting a rise in bonus remained steady, at 66%, compared to 67% in both 2022 and 2021’s survey respondents. The share reporting a rise in bonus of more than 50%, however, returned to the levels seen two years prior after a spike last year: down to 14% from 32% last year.

For full compensation data, download the full report.

About the authors

Jonathan Goldstein (jgoldstein@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Private Equity Practice for the Americas; he is based in the New York office.

John Rubinetti (jrubinetti@heidrick.com) is a partner in the New York office and a member of the Private Equity Practice.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Mohd Arsalan for his contributions to this report.

References

1 Maria Armental, “Private-equity exits sink to one of lowest points in over a decade,” Wall Street Journal, October 11, 2023.

2 US PE Breakdown Q2 2023, Pitchbook, July 2023, p. 25.

3 Maria Armental, “Private-equity exits sink to one of lowest points in over a decade,” Wall Street Journal, October 11, 2023.

4 US PE Breakdown Q2 2023, Pitchbook, July 2023, p. 8.

Related Services & Industries

Private Equity

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings