Evolving Society: How Boards are Evolving to Meet Challenges

Identified Country:

Boards and society: How boards are evolving to meet challenges from sustainability to geopolitical volatility

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Board of Directors Boards and society: How boards are evolving to meet challenges from sustainability to geopolitical volatility

Boards of directors face a growing array of complex issues, from climate and sustainability to generative AI and geopolitical disruptions, navigating an unpredictable landscape of interconnected demands.
November 18, 2024

Jeremy C. Hanson ,
Claire Skinner ,
Ron Soonieus, Sonia Tatar, David Young

Read the full report

Boards of directors are confronting an ever-expanding list of critical, complex topics—many of which reflect powerful external trends and disruptions. For the past few years, that list has been driven by an increased urgency to address climate and sustainability issues, and that imperative continues. But other issues—such as the rising importance of generative AI (GenAI) and intensifying trade and geopolitical disruptions—have also become a central part of the board agenda. These interconnected dynamics are forcing directors to navigate an increasingly unpredictable environment filled with conflicting and often politically charged demands.

BCG, the INSEAD Corporate Governance Centre, and Heidrick & Struggles have teamed up to understand how boards are responding to these complex trends and disruptions. This is the third report in our series. Our work this year includes a survey of 444 directors and executives around the world, along with a dozen roundtables that brought together more than 130 directors in North America, Europe, Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America. Our research sheds light on boards’ hard work on these issues. We see that they have made meaningful advances to address sustainability topics and are less confident when it comes to their understanding of and ability to capitalize on GenAI.

Our work also reveals that the lessons boards learned by addressing sustainability issues are helping them evolve toward a new model of governance. In our roundtable discussions, for example, directors articulated a need to transition from traditional models that primarily emphasize a rearview mirror approach focused on performance and compliance monitoring to a more dynamic approach that stresses forward-looking strategies and adaptability. “Effectively managing uncertainties starts by recognizing their constant presence and developing the resilience to navigate through them as they emerge,” a European director at a diversified conglomerate asserted. Another director pointed out, “You must continue to accept uncertainties; controllability does not exist. This requires resilience from people and companies—and that is far more essential than any specific actions.”

The current reality makes the role of directors more challenging than ever. But it also puts them in a position to add more value than ever. As issues grow more complex, sound business judgment and personal character become just as important as deep business expertise.

Boards confront multiple disruptions

The societal expectations for companies—and, by extension, for their directors—have never been higher. A majority of respondents (77%) report that boards have the responsibility to address broader societal concerns. Although 54% still believe that business objectives should remain the primary focus, 23% believe that boards should put societal concerns on a par with— or even above—such objectives.

As the role of business in society has evolved, boards are also confronting an increasingly long list of disruptions. Whether it is the rising importance of GenAI, the intensifying trade and geopolitical dynamics, or the variety of topics related to sustainability, the issues on the board agenda are changing rapidly and shrouded in significant uncertainty. At the same time, directors must manage the frequently conflicting demands of diverse stakeholders, including activists, in an increasingly polarized world.

Governance evolves amid change

The sheer number of issues confronting boards, along with the rapid pace of change—and the fact that their traditional responsibilities haven’t gone away—is making the pressure on directors increasingly palpable. When we asked what is blocking the board from spending more time on external shocks and disruptions, the top answer (38% of respondents) is that other important issues are crowding out such discussion. But we do see clear signs that board governance is evolving in this new context.

The push from investors, customers, employees, and other stakeholders to embrace sustainability has been steady for the past several years. And our research finds that boards have made meaningful progress in this area.

For example, in our 2023 survey, we found that one-quarter of directors lacked confidence in their company’s understanding of how sustainability would impact value creation. This year, that figure stands at just 9%. Last year, 37% said their company lacked the capability to scan for weak signals of future sustainability shocks; this year, only 24% say the same. And last year, 46% of directors said their company lacked a plan to turn sustainability shocks into competitive advantage, a figure that falls to 27% this year. It is likely that efforts to enhance board expertise have contributed to these improvements: a full 74% of respondents indicate that sustainability is a formal part of the board’s competency matrix this year.

Ensuring a resilient and adaptive board

Directors in our roundtable discussions made clear that the issues they face are interconnected, unpredictable, and filled with conflicting—often politically charged—demands. The difficulty to fully understand the nuances and consequences can leave boards uncertain and, at times, even paralyzed, potentially leading to delayed decisions and missed opportunities that undermine long-term growth. We encourage boards to take four primary steps to ensure that their governance approach can meet the challenges: enhance horizon scanning and risk management, take a long-term perspective grounded in purpose, lead across the divides, and drive impact beyond business boundaries.

Download the full report for more.

About the author

Jeremy Hanson (jhanson@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Chicago office and a member of the CEO & Board of Directors Practice.

Claire Skinner (cskinner@heidrick.com) is a partner in Hedrick & Struggles' London office and the global managing partner of Heidrick Consulting.

Ron Soonieus (soonieus.ron@advisor.bcg.com) is a senior advisor to the Boston Consulting Group and a director in residence at the INSEAD Corporate Governance Centre. He focuses on corporate governance and sustainability and is based in Amsterdam.

Sonia Tatar (sonia.tatar@insead.edu) is executive director of the INSEAD Corporate Governance Centre and the INSEAD Wendel International Centre
for Family Enterprise. She also serves on the boards of Chapter Zero France and Nasdaq Centre for Board Excellence.
David Young (young.david@bcg.com) is a managing director and senior partner at the Boston Consulting Group and is based in the firm’s Boston office. He leads the firm’s global work in total societal impact and sustainability and is a Fellow of the BCG Henderson Institute.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

Sustainability & Climate

Related Content

Human Resources Officers

Driving integration while maintaining cultures: Varian's head of HR on leading through an acquisition

Livia Freudl, head of HR at Varian, now a Siemens Healthineers company, discusses driving integration, maintaining company culture, and the role of HR in corporate sustainability and social responsibility.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings