CEO and board confidence monitor: A worried start to 2024 | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

CEO and board confidence monitor: A worried start to 2024

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

CEO & Board of Directors CEO and board confidence monitor: A worried start to 2024

A recent survey of CEOs and board members at companies around the world highlights that they have little confidence in their organizations’ ability to manage what matters most.
January 17, 2024

Heidrick & Struggles

Read the full article

A recent survey of CEOs and board members at companies around the world highlights that external factors, such as economic and geopolitical instability, are leading to low leadership confidence in the organization’s ability to meet 2024 goals, as well as low confidence in their longer-term succession and leadership planning.

Little confidence that organizations can manage what matters most

CEOs and board members are mostly aligned on which issues will be most significant in 2024. But both groups have little confidence their organizations can manage most of those issues.

Among CEOs, there is only one issue in their top 5 that more than half are confident the organization can manage: culture.

Among board members, there are no issues in their top 5 that more than half are confident the organization can manage.

Given the events of the past year, it’s hardly surprising that geopolitical volatility sits near the top of concerns and at the bottom of manageability. Our inability, as leaders and as people, to work across geopolitical divides, and the growth of divisiveness overall, stand in the way of progress on most important issues.
CEOs’ relatively high confidence in their organizations’ ability to manage culture may be because 83% of companies are currently working on their culture.1
It’s notable that climate change, an issue that many people see as pressing for the world and crucial for companies to address, is seen by relatively few CEOs and board members as significant for 2024—and when it is, it’s one that CEOs, in particular, are less concerned about addressing than most other issues. This may be because most companies have taken concrete steps to address aspects of this, such as their carbon footprints.

More confidence in the leadership team than in the organization’s ability to meet 2024 strategic goals

Given leaders’ general lack of confidence in managing the most significant issues, the fact that large shares of both CEOs and board members aren’t particularly confident in the organization’s ability to deliver on its 2024 strategic plan seems realistic, as even the best teams will be challenged amid such a highly uncertain environment.

That being said, regarding the leadership teams, there is somewhat better news: slightly higher shares of both CEOs and board members have confidence in the current leadership team.

More than half are concerned about next-generation executive leadership

Looking ahead, more than half of CEOs and of board members—57% in each group—are not at all confident, or only somewhat confident, that their CEO succession planning process is positioning the organization well for the future.2

Roughly half of CEOs and of board members are confident in their organization’s overall executive attraction, development, and retention strategy.

Both board members and CEOs are more confident in the board succession process than in the CEO succession process, though to varying degrees.

Considerations for 2024

Developing new leadership muscle: Going into 2024, directors and CEOs are wrestling to understand the boundaries of their own purpose and role, and the responsibility of business itself in the world. So, it is not surprising that the leaders who responded to this survey are most concerned about economic and geopolitical uncertainty, and least confident in their ability to address both. Shareholders, employees, customers—even governments—are demanding more access to and influence over corporate governance and decision-making. Divisiveness and polarization within these groups complicate the picture. Leading and governing across the boundaries that divide us—both within organizations and in the communities they serve—is proving to be the most important skill directors and CEOs are building right now.
Progress on issues such as climate change, wealth inequality, and business strategy itself will require this skill more than ever before.
The issues that matter most will certainly change over time, but we expect the ability to lead and govern across boundaries to lie at the core of effective leadership for the foreseeable future.

Increasing investment in succession planning: Uncertainty and higher expectations are driving a growing trend toward continuous, longer-term succession planning at both the board and CEO levels. We expect that trend to continue, and, we hope, will over time address the confidence gap our survey results show in how effective that planning is today.

About the research

In November 2023, Heidrick & Struggles fielded an online survey that garnered 3,156 respondents. Of those, 2,320 respondents were CEOs and 836 were directors. Forty-one percent were in Europe; 38% in North America; 10% in Asia Pacific; 4% in each of Latin America and the Middle East; and 2% in Africa. Respondents represented companies of all sizes; 23% reported annual revenue of $1 billion or more. Companies ranged across all industries.

References

1 To learn more about CEOs’ views on culture, including how it is linked to improved financial performance and retention, see "Aligning culture with the bottom line: Putting people first," Heidrick & Struggles.

2 This is an even lower level of confidence than we found when we surveyed US board members only early in 2023.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top US 2026 | Closing the CEO capability gap

Fortune 500 companies are increasingly appointing new CEOs who have prior experience in the role. However, a new survey finds that more than a third of US companies still don’t have a CEO with the capabilities the company needs to succeed in the near term. Some companies are planning their CEO successions more comprehensively and seeing greater success.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings