A look at leading board chairs today | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

A look at leading board chairs today
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Board of Directors A look at leading board chairs today

Comparing the backgrounds and role structures of current chairs suggests that most boards—even those with strong DE&I or ESG performance—could benefit from significantly broadening their expectations about the role and who can fill it.

Bonnie W. Gwin

We looked at the backgrounds, experience, and role structure of the chairs of the Fortune 50, Thomson Reuters D&I index companies, and MSCI ESG index companies,1 with the expectation that chairs of the companies in the latter two groups might be more diverse in terms of gender or racial and ethnic diversity, as well as diversity of experience or perspective. There are some hopeful signs in role structure, but, on the whole, there were few differences. These findings only increase the urgency of our call for boards to broaden their understanding of the qualities and areas of expertise that make an exceptional chair today. (For more, see “The chair imperative: A new mandate for leading in a new world.”)

Gender and racial and ethnic diversity

Although the share of female chairs is tiny among the Fortune 50, just 8%, that’s higher than among companies in the other two groups. Almost all chairs in all three groups were white.

Prior experience

Ninety percent or more of chairs in all three groups have experience as a CEO, CFO, or COO. This is much higher than the share of Fortune 500 board seats currently being filled by people with similar experience: our recent Board Monitor US 2021 report, for example, showed that boards are less and less often filling seats with people with CEO or CFO experience; the share was 51% in 2020, the lowest we have seen.

This suggests that although board leaders are broadening their mindsets about criteria for board members, they are more often still sticking with tradition as they consider the chair role.

Role structure

There are, however, marked differences in the structure of the role and whether the chair was an internal or external appointment among the groups. More than half of the companies on the ESG index have independent chairs, and chairs of D&I index companies are more than twice as often as others external appointments.

This suggests that companies in the latter two groups are more often seeking independent perspectives and new insights in their chairs. In the current context—one in which DE&I and ESG are metrics of success for more companies than ever before—we believe these companies may be leading the way for others in seeking such breadth of experience.

Even companies recognized for strong DE&I or ESG performance, are, on the whole, still choosing chairs based on criteria that are, we believe, important but not sufficient to succeed in today’s world. It is heartening that chairs of those companies are more often positioned to offer independent perspectives and new insights, but it is not enough. Experience as a CEO, CFO, or COO can be very helpful, and in some circumstances may be crucial. But it is no longer the only path to succeeding as chair. As we explore in depth elsewhere, boards that that actively seek forward-looking leaders and choose those leaders by giving a larger weighting to four collaborative skills will have the best chance of success. Those skills, culled from our extensive conversations with chairs around the world and our own experience, are listening, facilitating the right conversations, being inclusive, and building the right relationship with the CEO.

About the authors

Alice Breeden (abreeden@heidrick.com) is the leader of CEO & Board and Team Acceleration for Heidrick Consulting; she is based in Heidrick & Struggles' London office.

Bonnie Gwin (bgwin@heidrick.com) is a vice chairman in Heidrick & Struggles’ New York office and co-managing partner of the CEO & Board Practice.

References

1  The analysis includes 20 companies in the D&I index and 50 companies in the ESG index.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

Leadership Development

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings