Industrial focus: How companies in the Middle East are embracing sustainability | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Industrial focus: How companies in the Middle East are embracing sustainability

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Industrial Industrial focus: How companies in the Middle East are embracing sustainability

Sustainability is gathering momentum in the Middle East industrial sector, interviews with four industry leaders confirm. They share insights on how they are moving sustainability from the periphery to center stage.

Suhas Anand ,
Suvi Kitchloo

Read the full article

This is one in a series of sustainability-focused articles leading to COP 28.

“Sustainability is important, and it’s here to stay.” This message, echoed by all the executives in the Middle East we recently interviewed, underscores a growing regional acceptance that companies can and must transform in support of the worldwide push toward a net-zero future and the broader set of societal concerns.

The region has historically been slower to embrace environmental, social, and governance (ESG) issues as central to business strategy. However, as companies seek to globalize and diversify, there is a growing swell of concern and support for ESG—and now it is no longer regarded only as a risk mitigation measure but also as a source of potential value. Indeed, a soon-to-be-published survey on board effectiveness in the region found that 89% of board members said they believe ESG and sustainability will create long-term value for their companies.1

This is true across sectors, but the industrial sector is a critical driver of innovation that underpins the net-zero transition, and the sector will play a key role in the region’s transformation, too. Many industrial sector companies in the Middle East are entering the race to green their operations and products. Getting it right here can unlock sustainability across other parts of the economy.

Making sustainability fundamental to culture

The leaders we interviewed all agreed that sustainability can no longer be treated as a tangent to their operations; it must be integrated into the core of businesses and driven by leaders.

One director we spoke to said, “The role of leaders is not solely ‘I have a product and I want to sell it.’ It’s about the broader ecosystem that you create with your people, your partners, your customers—and about how you impact the lives of people outside work.”

While embedding sustainability starts with leadership, it needs to permeate every part of an organization. A leader of a major energy company highlighted how fundamental it has become. “Sustainability is cultural, and a bit like safety. We see clients evaluating our sustainability program as a differentiator. If you are not a safe contractor, some large energy companies, for example, won’t retain you as a service provider. The same applies for sustainability. Some clients are disqualifying contractors on this basis.”

To make culture change last, systemic alignment of culture principles and operations is crucial. Hard metrics are helpful in this area, and industrial companies in the Middle East are increasingly setting and tracking environmental targets—though many companies, leaders say, are still behind the global curve on objective measures. (For example, many companies have net-zero targets, but the exact intermediate milestones are not evaluated with the same sharp focus as, say, financial metrics).

Companies are making more progress in linking environmental performance with compensation. A number of leaders we spoke with, for example, noted that their companies are making a portion of leadership bonuses dependent on fulfilling sustainability targets.

Leaders are also embedding sustainability considerations in their recruitment function. One company is explicitly recruiting leaders who have a track record of performance on sustainability. Given that there is already significant competition for talent in the region and that such expertise is scarce, other companies may soon find themselves in fierce competition for leaders with relevant expertise.

That said, getting sustainability right may also give some companies an edge in the growing war for talent. The leaders we talked with as well as our own work suggest that, increasingly, talented candidates want to work for companies that ensure favorable social and environmental outcomes.

Fostering innovation and R&D

Not surprisingly, innovation was a recurring theme in our interviews. Sustainable technologies that have existed for decades—such as carbon capture, sustainable aviation fuel, and hydrogen—have moved from fringe components of some industrial processes to standalone offerings.

Executives across the industrial sector are also reporting increased reliance on sustainable energy generation methods such as hydrogen, solar, and wind. They are finding new ways to integrate these into their processes, too, reinvesting increasing proportions of their profits into R&D.

Innovation is closely linked with culture, and some industry leaders mentioned idea-generation contests as a big part of their strategy on innovation. In these contests, employees are rewarded for designing sustainable innovations with applications in business and, sometimes, in their own homes. For example, employees at one company came up with an idea to reduce waste by developing a new take on automatic home composters that convert food waste into high-quality garden fertilizer.

Doubling down on communication and engagement

All these efforts require companies to double down on their strategies for communication and engagement both externally and internally, executives agreed. They need to create public profiles that align with the values of customers and future employees. These profiles, like the spread of information within companies, must be built on top of real-world work on culture and innovation.

As sustainability takes on higher priority, industrial sector leaders in the Middle East agree that their biggest job in seizing the opportunity and avoiding the risks is to lead by example, making investment, operational, and hiring decisions with sustainability at their core.

About the authors

Suhas Anand (sanand@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ Dubai office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

Suvi Kitchloo (skitchloo@heidrick.com) is a principal in the Dubai office and a member of the global Industrial Practice.

Reference

1 Board Effectiveness Review 2023: Determining Board Effectiveness Across the GCC, GCC Board Directors Institute, forthcoming on gccbdi.org.

Related Services & Industries

Industrial

Sustainability & Climate

Related Content

On-Demand Talent

Three forces reshaping building products leadership—and how interim leaders are filling the gap

Conversations at this year's NAHB International Builders' Show revealed three forces stretching executive bandwidth in building products: continuous M&A, the push for operational resilience, and the modernization of commercial models. The execution challenge is no longer whether leaders see the need to act—but how they resource and sequence the response.

Human Resources Officers

Chief people officer focus: Transforming HR across borders

Shirley Zhou, head of HR for ASP APAC & vice president of Fortive Asia, describes the evolution of her career and the value of taking a long-term perspective on people decisions, particularly in volatile environments.

CEO & Board of Directors

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden

Heidrick & Struggles’ Mohamad Turk and Jane Bargmann speak with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden, on leadership in a new cultural context and the capabilities needed to lead transformation in the fast-evolving Middle East market.

Leadership Development

Leadership assurance: How one company achieved a meaningful return on its investment in executive coaching

The experience of a heavy industrial company’s leadership team shows how executive coaching can create objective value.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings