Leadership teams in the top 50 Middle East companies: The path to the C-suite | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Leadership teams in the top 50 Middle East companies: The path to the C-suite

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Leadership Succession Planning Leadership teams in the top 50 Middle East companies: The path to the C-suite

Explore our first study of key leadership roles at leading Middle East companies as well as our three considerations for leaders.
June 26, 2024

Richard Guest ,
Maliha Jilani

Read the full article

Heidrick & Struggles tracks changes in the following executive roles: chief financial officers (CFO); chief human resources officers (CHRO); chief information, technology, or digital officers (CIO); chief legal officers or general counsels (CLO); chief marketing officers (CMO); and chief supply chain officers (CSCO).

Our first study of key leadership roles at leading Middle East companies shows that in 2023 companies relied more often on internal promotions; when hiring externally they showed a more marked preference for executives who came from the same sector and had previous C-suite experience; and fewer newcomers were women than in previous years.

An increase in internal appointments. Overall, 53% of current executive team members were hired externally. This ratio is relatively persistent among most roles. However, there are two outliers: 73% of CIOs were hired externally, while only 35% of CHROs came from outside the organization. The heavy reliance on external talent for technology leadership roles is particularly notable because the rapidly increasing demand for executives with AI expertise will likely exacerbate competition for these leaders even further.

However, in 2023, more than half of new hires were internal promotions: 56%, a marked rise from earlier years. This suggests that companies have been able to improve their internal leadership development pipelines overall.

Sector experience. Among executives who were external hires, 66% came from a different industry.  Roles such as CHRO and CFO saw a larger infusion of talent from other sectors, while CEO and chief supply chain officer positions have more often been filled by people with sector-specific experience.

However, the trend is shifting here as well: over the past two years, and in 2023 in particular, companies showed an increased preference for hiring executives from the same sector: 40% of external hires came from the same sector in 2023, up from 18% in 2021.

First-time leaders. It’s also notable that 56% of externally hired CXOs came into their current roles without any prior C-suite experience. This is most often the case with chief supply chain officers, chief marketing officers, and chief information officers.

But there has been a shift in preferences here as well: in 2023, 53% of external hires had prior C-suite experience, compared to 35% in 2022 and 46% in 2021.

Gender balance. Twelve percent of the CXOs are women; they are most often CHROs, at 28%, and least often CEOs, 2%. Forty-four percent of women were hired from outside their current companies, compared to 53% of men. Here, too, 2023 saw a change of trend, with a decrease in the share of appointments that went to women: from 14% in 2021 and 16% in 2022 to 11% in 2023.

Three considerations

Succession planning: While the increased share of internal appointments indicates good progress in the development of internal pipelines, Middle East companies could do more, particularly since they seem comfortable with appointing first-timers even to fill critical roles. Building their bench deeper into the organization and across all leadership roles should help ensure they have viable candidates across many timeframes and scenarios.
Gender balance: Our analysis suggests that companies can double down on increasing gender balance across their talent pools, with a focus on P&L roles, which globally more often lead to CEO or board positions. In our experience, companies that are successful in developing and retaining more women in leadership positions take an intentional approach throughout the leadership pipeline, from attraction through senior leadership succession planning.
Onboarding practices: Fifty-two percent of the leaders in roles were appointed since January 2021, and many came with no previous C-suite or sector experience. The step-change to an executive role in itself comes with significant pressure, and being new to the sector and the company—and perhaps, for many executives, to the region as well—adds additional layers of complexity. This makes a hyper-tailored onboarding critical: boards, CEOs, and HR teams should work together to shape onboarding, mentoring, and development programs based on the information they gleaned through the recruitment process for each incoming leader. Companies should pay particular attention to the impact leaders hired externally could have on the organizational culture, making sure there is a healthy balance between maintaining and bolstering the existing culture and having potential to reshape it for future needs.

About the authors

Richard Guest (rguest@heidrick.com) is the partner in charge of Heidrick & Struggles’ Middle East and North Africa, based in the Dubai office, and the regional managing partner of the global Technology & Services Practice for Asia Pacific and the Middle East.

Maliha Jilani (mjilani@heidrick.com) is the leader of the Social Impact practice and co-leader of the Board practice in the Middle East and North Africa region; she is based in the Dubai office.

Shaloo Kakkar Kulkarni (skulkarni@heidrick.com) is a partner in the London and Middle East offices and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

Markus Wiesner (mwiesner@heidrick.com) is a partner in the Dubai and Singapore offices and the regional managing partner of Heidrick Consulting for Asia Pacific, Middle East, and Emerging Markets.

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Related Content

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Healthcare & Life Sciences

MedTech focus: The rise of the strategy & corporate development function

MedTech companies are increasingly embracing the strategy or corporate development chief role. Insights from companies that have found leaders for this critical function offer a blueprint for recruiting this talent.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on sitting CEOs at the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings