Why boards should think like activists | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Why boards should think like activists
Explore this page Focus on the board’s strategic purposeEnsure the board has the right mix of competenciesEnsure the company has the right executive team for the long termAbout the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Board Effectiveness Why boards should think like activists

After slowing for some of 2020 during the pandemic, activist investors are back. Many boards will benefit from asking themselves some of the questions activists would ask—before activists do.

As boards adjust to new norms following the events of the last year, thoughtful boards will understand that the new demands on them and the agility many discovered during the pandemic together present an opportunity to reassess themselves and senior leadership teams and make changes that might not have been possible before. Furthermore, if boards don’t undertake a reassessment themselves, activists may well see new opportunities. Following the pandemic-related downturn in activist activity of mid-2020, the first quarter of 2021 saw a second consecutive quarter of elevated global activity—53 new campaigns were initiated, which is in line with first-quarter 2020 levels.1

Boards that evaluate themselves and their organization’s executive leaders as activists might (and before the activists do), focus on the board’s specific purpose in strategic planning and implementation, and stay in touch with their other major shareholders have the best chance of providing stability as activist activity ramps up again.

Focus on the board’s strategic purpose

All boards benefit from ensuring their members are aligned, with a common purpose and shared goals in support of the company’s strategy. At a time when that strategy and its implementation may have changed much faster than most boards refresh themselves, such reflection can be particularly valuable. (For more on aligning board members, see “A board review that accelerates competitiveness.” For more on new approaches to board refreshment, see “Building the foundation for better board refreshment.”) Boards should start by making the time to assess their role in the context of today’s and, possibly more important, tomorrow’s environment, taking into account organizational purpose, pandemic recovery, and political volatility, among many other considerations. They should assess their own ability to mobilize, execute, and transform with agility—and their ability to support the leadership team in doing the same. If boards don’t step back and assess their purpose and strategy themselves, an activist may well force the conversation. Boards should also stay actively engaged and in communication with institutional or other major shareholders in order to ensure that their perspectives and needs are addressed.

Ensure the board has the right mix of competencies

Even the most well-managed organizations may well have—and need to understand—weak spots in their leadership, some of which may have been exacerbated by the events of 2020. As the remit for boards continues to grow, so do the expectations of the board’s agenda and dynamics, composition, and capabilities. Boards should review their status, capabilities, and refreshment processes regularly to help ensure they are as strong as possible since, again, activists may otherwise force changes. (For more on the challenges facing boards and how they can meet them, see Future-Proofing Your Board.)

Boards should review their status, capabilities, and refreshment processes regularly to help ensure they are as strong as possible since, again, activists may otherwise force changes.

Review the board’s agenda and dynamics

In the wake of radically shifting their processes and norms, boards can now take some time to review their priorities and ensure that their meeting agendas and overall efforts are helping their organizations meet their current strategic goals. Boards can use their organization’s purpose as a starting point to determine whether their current agenda and activities are working to support the fulfillment of that purpose. They must also ensure that the responsibilities of the board and management are clearly delineated.

Assess the board’s overall composition and capabilities

Today, more public company boards work harder to align their composition with their company’s strategy, for example, and to focus more on the value of diversity in making better decisions as well as meeting stakeholder expectations. In addition to a review of their strategic purpose, most boards will benefit from reassessing their composition: the mix of skills, expertise, backgrounds, and board experience their members need in order to take their companies into the future. Taking this time will allow chairs and nominating committees to understand if they need to make changes to cadence, term length, term or age limits, or board size.

In addition to a review of their strategic purpose, most boards will benefit from reassessing their composition: the mix of skills, expertise, backgrounds, and board experience their members need in order to take their companies into the future.

Heidrick & Struggles’ most recent research on Fortune 500 boards found that in 2020, boards continued to prioritize adding directors with prior experience serving on public boards—62% of appointments in 2020, respectively. Nearly a quarter of new director seats were filled with people with financial risk expertise, but only 6% were filled with directors with sustainability experience. (For more, see Board Monitor US 2021.)

Board tenure and refreshment can be vulnerabilities for boards, as many boards lack diversity and long-tenured members can be seen as too close to management. Our research found that Fortune 500 boards continued to make significant progress appointing women—41% of all appointments in 2020, slightly down from 44% in 2019. But the most marked change was in the share of new Black directors in 2020: 28% of the seats filled in 2020 went to Black directors, up from just 10% the prior year and years of little progress before that. Just over three-quarters of those appointments were made after the murder of George Floyd on May 25, 2020. However, the appointments of other people of color continues to be disappointingly low, with only 9% of seats going to Asians and Asian Americans, and 4% to Latinx people. Looking ahead, we believe it is crucial that boards not trade off one form of diversity for another.

Nominate someone who thinks like an activist

All that said, one additional area of expertise to consider in the current context is the ability to ask questions from an activist’s perspective—particularly but far from exclusively on financials. Having such a director can ensure boards look at the fundamentals with fresh eyes. Boards can do this by making sure they have one or two directors with investment expertise or who can provide a corporate perspective with deep financial acumen, such as a public company CFO. Understanding the types of financial situations that can draw activist attention—large cash reserves, for example—can also help the board and management prepare.

For boards of organizations that may need to restructure, bringing such expertise in house is even more important. Intimate knowledge of the process, fees, creditor rights, and key players—including lenders, law firms, turnaround consultants, and restructuring advisors—can help boards make better decisions with tight timelines. (For more on restructuring, see “Restructuring expertise: Bringing a new voice to the boardroom” and “Successful financial restructuring during unprecedented times: An interview with Stephen Spencer, managing director at Houlihan Lokey.”)

Ensure the company has the right executive team for the long term

Boards should use what they learned about the executive leadership team during the past year to assess whether they have the right team for the long term. More than ever, internal and external scrutiny is focused on how people are being managed, whether operations are sustainable, and what the purpose-driven business strategy will be moving forward.

When evaluating current CEOs and making succession plans, boards should keep in mind how management responded to the challenges of the COVID-19 crisis, global calls for social and racial justice, and the greater focus on organizational purpose through 2020, as well as how investors, employees, and other stakeholders reacted. But boards must balance those actions with the leadership capabilities that will be needed to guide the company going forward. (For more on leadership capabilities, see “Agility for the long term.”)

An important element of succession planning, particularly after a crisis that may have brought the stakeholders of a company together, is to de-personalize the choice of the CEO—as activists typically do. Too often, succession planning is about individuals rather than what the CEO will actually need to be able to do. Developing a CEO profile requires a clear understanding of the company’s strategy and challenges as well as what combination of CEO skills and priorities will best convince all investors that the best leaders are both in place and being developed to ensure stable leadership in the long term. In addition, the volatility of 2020 has underscored the importance for organizations to have ready-now successors in the event of an emergency. (For more on emergency succession, see “The clock is ticking on CEO succession: Is your board ready?”)

Developing a CEO profile requires a clear understanding of the company’s strategy and challenges as well as what combination of CEO skills and priorities will best convince all investors that the best leaders are both in place and being developed to ensure stable leadership in the long term.

Boards that take this moment to evaluate their capabilities and priorities as well as those of their senior leaders, reassess their strategic role, update succession and crisis management plans, and stay in contact with institutional investors will help their companies thrive. Taking the dispassionate perspective of an activist while doing so may well strengthen companies enough that they won’t face another round of disruption.

About the author

John S. Wood (jwood@heidrick.com) is a vice chairman in Heidrick & Struggles’ New York office and a member of the CEO & Board Practice.

Reference

1  Lazard, “Lazard's Quarterly Review of Shareholder Activism – Q1 2021,” April 14, 2021, lazard.com.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

CEO & Board of Directors

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden

Heidrick & Struggles’ Mohamad Turk and Jane Bargmann speak with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden, on leadership in a new cultural context and the capabilities needed to lead transformation in the fast-evolving Middle East market.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings