The changing leadership style of today’s general counsel | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

The changing leadership style of today’s general counsel
Explore this page Looking forwardAbout the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Legal, Risk & Compliance The changing leadership style of today’s general counsel

A recent survey of general counsels shows that the best leaders are more than strong legal technicians and effective business partners; they also know how to inspire and create meaning among their teams.

David Burd

The past few years have been a time of significant change, perhaps best exemplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and global racial justice movements that have shaped society and business since the beginning of 2020. Employees expect more from their organizations and want more from their careers—reflected in an increase in employee activism1—and corporate leaders have had to step up and act upon those demands in order to survive and thrive.

General counsels and chief legal officers have not been immune from this—legal leaders have been forced to evolve as well. The most successful general counsels and chief legal officers have, for a number of years now, become more strategic and have been gaining significant influence in both the decision-making processes of their companies and in setting the moral direction of their organizations. (For more, see “How the general counsel role is changing in 2020: A new job description?”)  More and more, they are being asked to determine not only what is legal but what is right, as corporate reputation is increasingly being measured against the good or harm companies do in communities and the way they treat their employees, suppliers, and partners.

As pressure mounts for organizations to disclose their environmental, social, and governance (ESG) actions, the need to define their purpose and do good will only become more central to organizations’ strategies. In addition, given the events of the past few years, leading with meaning and inspiring teams are increasingly becoming central leadership assets if leaders are to engage and retain their teams. General counsels are playing prominent roles in their companies in both of these areas.

These changes to the leadership capabilities of general counsels and chief legal officers are reflected in the trends we have seen in the evolution of their leadership styles over the past six years. Between 2015 and 2021, 1,189 legal senior executives took a proprietary Heidrick & Struggles survey—the combined results of which highlight how much each leader leans toward each of the eight styles of leadership (see chart, “Leadership styles of chief legal officers and general counsel leaders 2015–2021”). (To learn more about Heidrick & Struggles’ Leadership Signature survey, see Karen Rosa West, "What's your leadership signature?”)

The biggest shift we have seen is an increase in the collaborator leadership style, which is defined as being empathetic, team building, talent-spotting, and coaching oriented. Now more than ever, collaboration has become important for the most senior legal executives in building their teams, as employees are increasingly prioritizing inspiring, engaging workplaces, and meaningful work. It is also crucial to success with the expanded strategic and operational scope of the senior legal role.

In that context, it is also clear why the energizer style is steadily gaining ground. The main characteristics of these leaders include being charismatic and inspiring and having the ability to connect emotionally and provide meaning. The rise in this style is likely a clear consequence of the role chief legal officers are now playing in setting the moral compass of their organizations as well as the increased necessity to bring purpose into the way their functions and companies operate.

The third style that gained some prominence since 2015, the harmonizer, is also notable. These leaders are seen as reliable, quality driven, and execution focused, able to create positive and stable environments and inspire loyalty. This style has doubled in prevalence from 2015 to 2021 and peaked at 28% in 2020—the year the pandemic hit most of the world—when creating positive and stable environments for workers became more important than ever. Although the share of harmonizers fell a bit after 2020, its overall rise indicates the increasing and continued importance of connection and reliability.

Of course, some leadership styles have declined in prevalence. In particular, there are fewer leaders who have producer as their main leadership style—producers are those who are characterized by being task-focused, linear thinkers, and wedded to tradition. This style seems less likely to be fit for purpose in a continuously evolving world where agility, diversity, innovation, and collaboration are prioritized.

Looking forward

Legal acumen and technical knowledge have long been table stakes for the role of general counsels and chief legal officers, along with the ability to provide objective judgment and serve as a counselor to the CEO, board, and senior team. As noted, we have seen a growing expectation from CEOs and boards over the past number of years that chief legal officers serve as business partners who can effectively work across functions and advise the entire organization. Given the events of the past two years, this trend has been magnified and sharpened, with a broader, more collaborative, and more engaging approach to leadership increasingly being prized. Indeed, the best legal leaders of today—and tomorrow—are more than strong legal technicians and effective business partners; they also know how to inspire and create meaning among their teams at a time when inspiration and purpose are increasingly important to employees.

About the author

David Burd (dburd@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Washington, D.C., office and a member of the Legal, Risk, Compliance & Government Affairs Practice.

References

1  Megan Reitz and John Higgins, “Leading in an Age of Employee Activism,” MIT Sloan Management Review, January 19, 2022, sloanreview.mit.edu.

Related Services & Industries

Leadership Development

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Related Content

Corporate Affairs

Balancing reputation and risk: The role of today’s corporate affairs director

Reputation is now a measurable asset. Today’s corporate affairs directors must lead cross-functional, board-level strategy to turn trust and risk management into competitive advantage.

Legal Officers

Government and corporate affairs focus: Finding leaders who can effectively manage political and regulatory risk

Navigating the constantly evolving global political and geopolitical landscape is a strategic necessity today. Our work with US and global companies suggests a comprehensive menu of options and some questions companies can use to navigate them, whether they are just starting out or already have a foundation to build on.

Social Impact

Building trust in AI systems and AI systems that deserve our trust: A conversation with Miriam Vogel, president and CEO of EqualAI

Legal professionals face unique challenges in implementing AI while maintaining compliance and ethical standards.Miriam Vogel shares what it means to her to lead in an AI-enabled world and how she believes that legal leaders  must balance guardrails and innovation to remain competitive. This conversation explores how executives can build and use AI tools that earn and deserve trust in the legal sector.

Legal Officers

How legal leaders are using AI today

Our second annual survey of legal professionals in the legal function shows that legal leaders are slightly more cautious about AI than their peers in other functions across the C-suite. The research examines how corporate legal departments are implementing AI technologies while maintaining regulatory compliance and business acumen. These findings provide critical insights for the legal industry and executive search professionals seeking qualified candidates with emerging technology expertise.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings