Board Monitor Mexico 2024 | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Board Monitor Mexico 2024

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Boards & Governance Board Monitor Mexico 2024

Heidrick & Struggles’ Board Monitor Mexico 2024 report explores six ways boards, and specifically BMV IPC boards, are reshaping their processes to thrive now.
October 09, 2024

Heidrick & Struggles

Read the full report

Our analysis of the newest class of directors added to BMV IPC boards, and historical trends in the backgrounds of people being added to those boards, is available here.

For many years, Heidrick & Struggles has been tracking the trends that have shaped the global governance arena including important long-term changes in board independence, diversity, financial oversight, risk management, and in the shareholder base the directors serve.

More recently, we have been helping our clients understand the expanding environment in which they are operating. How is the role of business in society changing? What are the implications for directors? What does the future hold?

Clarity has been hard to find as directors struggle to draw reasonable boundaries and consider their responsibilities in the midst of a rolling global pandemic, geopolitical uncertainty and conflict, emerging technologies, cybersecurity concerns, and a long list of social and environmental concerns. While there are important industry and regional differences—indeed, differences from one company to another, most accept that the role of the board is expanding. More is at stake. More is uncertain. And more is expected now of directors.

While this expanding role creates added pressures, it is also creating opportunity. New approaches are emerging for boards and individual directors who see promise in this shifting landscape. In what follows, we draw on the results of two recent surveys of CEOs and directors around the world, and our experience, to describe how directors and CEOs are answering six questions that are reshaping the boardroom.

Six questions reshaping the boardroom

Who is influencing the board agenda today—and are board members happy with that?
Where does the board spend its time—and are those the right places?
How are boards addressing the widening risk environment?
Are boards more operationally involved?
How should boards engage with the workforce?
How are boards thinking about diversity today?

Who is influencing the board agenda today—and are board members happy with that?

To better understand the relative influence of stakeholders today, we asked directors and CEOs to stipulate which stakeholders have accelerated their influence most in the post-Covid environment. Overall, they report that the CEO and leadership team, the broader workforce, regulators, and consumers and customers have increased their influence more than others. Respondents across Latin America—in Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico—particularly highlighted increased influence from consumers, the CEO and leadership team, and regulators. Given social shifts in Latin America, governments with stronger social and regulatory agendas, and customers rapidly shifting their preferences to more agile and socially conscious companies, these groups are becoming paramount to address going forward. In Latin America and Mexico, regulators are increasing their influence in sectors other than financial services, and expectations are that that trend is likely to increase, particularly in the energy, infrastructure, and industrial sectors. To make the most of increased opportunities for both local and foreign investment in Mexico, maintaining good relationships with regulators, developing a profound understanding of regulatory changes, and lobbying efforts will be paramount.

Where does the board spend its time—and are those the right places?

Globally, more respondents report spending more time on emerging technologies and AI as well as cybersecurity compared to pre-Covid than any other category. Consistent with our findings on who is influencing the board, attention to mainstream and activist shareholder concerns shows the lowest increase. The Latin American survey data also highlights AI but shows some other notable differences in areas of increased focus, including stakeholder and mainstream shareholder concerns and diversity. These reflect, in part, Latin American companies’ notable focus on preparing their organizations to improve their cultures and their CEO succession processes.

How are boards addressing the widening risk environment?

To better understand how boards are adjusting to this new reality, we asked what steps they have taken since Covid began to better manage uncertainty and risk. Respondents remain anchored primarily in risk management practices that are “internal” in nature; that is, derived from interactions among the board itself and between the board and management. However, we also see a growing willingness to draw in the contributions of “external” experts. Respondents in Latin America are somewhat less focused on talking with management and somewhat more focused on advisory boards and gaining an external perspective as they navigate through their challenges.

Are boards more operationally involved?

When we asked directors and CEOs whether their boards were more operationally involved, and thus crossing the line between oversight and management, survey respondents in Latin America far more often than others say involvement is frequent. And looking at both frequent and occasional involvement, leaders in Latin America report being involved more often than leaders in any other region.

In Latin America, respondents also more frequently cite specialized knowledge, as well as CEO bandwidth. This aligns with the diverse and complex challenges companies in the region are facing, which require boards to expand areas of specialization that current management teams are still developing (such as cultural transformation, succession, cybersecurity, AI, political and regulatory shifts, and diversification strategies).

How are boards engaging with the workforce?

Workers are increasingly influencing the board agenda globally. A number of trends are driving this, including demographic changes, income inequality concerns, talent shortages, inflation, nearshore, new labor regulation in Mexico, and the proliferation of social media organizing platforms. As we entered 2024, other recent research has found, workforce attraction and retention was the third-highest concern of directors, behind geopolitical risk and economic uncertainty—but it ranked in the bottom half of issues the board feels the company is equipped to address. To better understand the impact of this on how the board does its work, we asked respondents how they think they should engage with employees other than the most senior executives. Latin American survey respondents scored slightly higher that global average, at 88%, with CEOs and directors tied. And it’s likely even higher at family-owned companies in the region, since families shape the culture and employees appreciate having the family close to the company. For family-owned company leaders, “being seen” by the employees is a source of motivation and creates a sense of belonging. On a global basis, respondents most often preferred to engage with the workforce through the use of surveys, town halls, and direct engagement with small groups of employees without management present. Latin American leaders were generally less interested in surveys as a way of understanding employee concerns than peers in other countries.

How are boards thinking about diversity today?

BMV IPC boards are adding directors with more varied sources of expertise than in many prior years. Last year the share of seats going to people with the most traditional areas of expertise—people who have been CEOs or CFOs—fell again, and the share of first-time board members, while much lower than last year’s two-thirds, is still notably higher than in earlier years. These trends underscore boards’ interest in fresh perspectives and in building their knowledge in other areas, including on topics the management team is also still learning.

The share of seats going to women has remained roughly steady in recent years. Though the share is lower than in the United States, for example, it is a sign of overall continued commitment to building boards that are more gender diverse.

Recommendations

Change is a constant, and this has been particularly pointed for directors in recent years as society looks to business for more than it ever has. But the fog is clearing for boards that are learning to adapt. Many are finding that societal impact and shareholder value can go hand in hand, and, if managed well, the director role can be less overwhelming and more rewarding. We recommend that boards:

Increase investment in succession planning
Increase stakeholder engagement
Cultivate a learning culture on the board
Expand sources of expertise
Improve company culture

Acknowledgments

Heidrick & Struggles wishes to thank the following executives for sharing their insights: Jose Antonio Quesada, president, CNCPIE, and Yvonne Ochoa Rosellini, professional independent board member. Their views are personal and do not necessarily represent those of the companies they are affiliated with.

Heidrick & Struggles also wishes to thank the following colleagues for their contributions to this article: Lewis Adams, Lydia Peraza, and Carlos Vázquez.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Inclusive Leadership

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings