Leadership Development Plans: Making It a Team Sport

Identified Country:

Making leadership development a team sport

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Leadership Development Making leadership development a team sport

Building, leading, and participating in effective teams is a significant part of what differentiates the best leaders from the rest. Leadership development programs that invest in whole teams rather than individuals can give their companies an edge.

Alex Libson ,
TA Mitchell ,
Mark Watt

Read the full article

Companies are finding it ever harder to attract and retain the talent they need at any level, including leadership. A recent survey we conducted found that 76% of executives are very or entirely open to changing companies in the next one to three years.1 Retention, therefore, is key. And employees value career development opportunities: 92% of respondents to the same survey chose some option related to promotion or development as a tactic that would encourage them to stay. Companies, therefore, need to pay more attention than ever to developing the skills and capabilities of their current and potential future leaders.

Our recent work highlights the fact that developing leaders in ways that include a focus on teams and the power of complementary strengths can give companies the best chance of having the leaders they need for the near- and longer term. Leadership development has traditionally been focused on individuals as leaders, designed to help people lead organizations and effectively manage others. But this model has left out an important step between the leader and the organization: the team. More often, executive teams are inherited, or built through individual promotions up the ranks, rather than by starting with the purpose of a given team, at a given time, in service of delivering the current strategy.

Yet the ability of an executive team as a whole to lead effectively is increasingly crucial to the success of a company because the expectations of employees, other stakeholders, and society at large are multiplying in a volatile environment. Effective leadership teams can scale, sometimes exponentially, the effectiveness of individual leaders by broadening what they know, building trust that percolates throughout the organization, and maintaining alignment on purpose and goals. The idea of working in teams is also applicable to collaboration in broader ecosystems to meet broader goals.

Some companies are beginning to put teams at the core of their executive development.

One important difference in thinking about leadership this way is that, as in any team sport, it requires playing to the strengths of each team member, encouraging and enabling each to bring their best self to the team in order to succeed. The first step is gaining a clear understanding of each executive’s skillsets and capabilities.2 Second, it takes a clear understanding of the work the executive team is meant to do—and the work that only this team, and only together, can do. Third, it takes a coach: a senior leader who is skilled at creating a plan and a focus and who works to empower and build trust between players, turning talented individuals into a cohesive, high-performing team. In our experience, great teams focus on team development in a similar way sports teams do: using a coach and a coaching development program. Development in this context can take the form of experiential learning, in which teams of executives attack strategic problems together in the context of learning new capabilities.

Strong coaches focus on dynamics and flows, trust and pace, intersections and boundaries. They can instill a high level of belief in team success and an understanding that it doesn’t matter if someone is the best on their own. Conversely, if someone is destructive to the team, no matter if they are the star player, they need to go. And, just as no athletic team can be successful if every player has the same position on the field, or all are good catchers but none can pitch, for example, diverse teams in corporations, in terms of identity and experience, are better equipped to deliver, beginning to end. The best team leaders and members know each other’s talents as well as their own and can build on them in order to help their teams and organizations succeed, whether that organization is a football club or an industrial company.

Drawing from our work with companies around the world, we have distilled some questions leaders can ask themselves as they seek to develop themselves and others within and alongside their teams.

Where leaders and teams should focus first: Questions leaders should ask themselves

When deciding where to start, we have found it helpful for leaders to ask questions in the following five areas: curiosity, courage, connection, commitment, and collaboration.

Curiosity

Do you know yourself and what you bring to the team?
Do you understand what areas of expertise and leadership capabilities will make your team more effective?
Do you seek out diverse and alternative views and see challenges as a positive way to raise the game and get to better outcomes?

Courage

Have you stepped out of the old ways of doing things? Are you comfortable thinking in innovative ways and moving beyond old solutions for new problems?
Are you bold in your decision making and do you ensure that all team members see all decisions as signposts of the path forward?
Are you and your team disciplined in your decision-making? Do team members have the courage to dissent when decisions or process don’t align with goals or purpose?
Do you create the space for others to lead?

Connection

Are you working to build connections within the team and to other teams, to build momentum and energy toward the organizational goal?
Are you comfortable with the reality that teams will evolve over time and confident in your ability to draw on the strengths within your network to form and reform teams?

Commitment

Is your commitment to your team’s shared purpose evident in what you do—and don’t do?
Are your commitments well understood both within the team and externally—both within the organization and outside it?
Do you team members support each other and hold each other to account for reaching your shared intention and ambition?

Collaboration

Are the individual roles and responsibilities of each team member well understood by all?
Are those roles and responsibilities designed to help the team meet its own, and the organization’s, purpose and goals?
Do all the team members know and value what their peers bring to the team and how they can accelerate the team’s performance together?
Are you working to connect those working in a hybrid or virtual world with those working in your office?

How leadership teams shift with shifting priorities

Looking at team composition in the context of a clear team purpose—or rethinking that purpose in the case of change or hardship—enables leaders and team members to be more thoughtful about who is on the team, what they and every other member bring to the team, what only this team can deliver, and how and why they come together to do so. Sophisticated teams will know when it is time to shift the composition of the team to deliver on the purpose and be able to separate the people from the roles needed in the team, knowing that team members will step in and out over time. This understanding builds not just the interconnectedness of the top team but feeds down through the organization.

Purpose for team alignment

At one company we’re familiar with, most of the leadership team took their value and identity from managing a P&L and having large teams and were rewarded for their individual P&L status; that’s what got visibility at the executive committee level and respect from peers. But the company needed to transform, and the fastest way to growth was through deepening their relationships with existing customers. The operational delivery needed to be seen as providing the fuel for strategic transformation rather than a goal in itself. In that context, leaders who held cross-organizational customer relationships were needed on the executive committee, while those who delivered operational capability joined a team focused on driving execution. In addition, to ensure that all teams members were focused on building deep client relationships, the incentive structure was changed from individual P&L to success to a team incentive—they all won together or they did not win at all.

Putting the right people in the right roles

A start-up’s founder and partner (but not the CEO) remained on the senior executive team through several rounds of funding. However, there was a moment when significant funding came in and he needed to pivot to product development. At that time, he focused on the fact that the executive team had kept growing, which had, over time, muddled its purpose. The team was spending time on operational updates, issues, and risks that should have been owned at the operational levels—which were also growing. The founder suggested to the CEO that the company would benefit from building different leadership teams for the new purpose. The top team was split into four teams and the founder stepped down from the executive team. The first team defined its purpose as focusing on transformation and growth; the second team became the operational team comprised of a site build team and an operational team focused on product delivery; the new technical team focused on building operational capability at pace; and the fourth team became a product marketing team. The teams were interconnected, and the connections the individual team members had formed on the original team underpinned the next stage of growth. Through reviewing the original team’s purpose, and reviewing its composition, they were able to make all of the company’s leaders comfortable with the idea that this was a necessary shift and that, in time, composition might need to shift again.

Trust is the foundation of all great teams

A high-performing lawyer on the verge of burnout worked with her team to understand their dynamics and found that low trust on the team and poor-quality interactions were leading to the leader’s inability to let her objectively highly capable senior team members lean in. With this knowledge, the leader was able to hit reset with the team, first aligning on what they were there to deliver and then looking at themselves to share how they each contribute to deliver the outcomes. Through this process, they were able to connect with each other in service of the work they needed to do and build the trust foundations that were required to deliver on their goals.

How some companies are moving toward a new way of developing leaders

To move toward this new way of developing leaders as teams rather than individuals, CEOs and other senior team leaders first need to identify high-performing executives who are self-aware enough to know they have skills in need of development or have gaps in their skill set that might be filled by other team members, and want to learn and build a team that shares the leadership responsibility in ways that unlock the power of the executive teams and the teams they lead. This cannot be an exercise or initiative confined to HR or the team leader alone, though HR may facilitate the process. To really unlock the power of the team, all team members must play their part to develop the team. Then, companies can start to apply the lessons below; where to start will depend on each company’s specific concerns about its teams.

Reigniting the power of the team: The sum of the diverse parts is greater than that of the whole

A fast-moving consumer goods divisional executive of a $2.5 billion pan-African business saw that his team was at a low point in terms of both finances and the overall team health and relationships. They had fallen far behind on their targets, the team’s star player was working only for himself—and others saw their leader as always siding with him—and the team was largely misaligned with headquarters in terms of both business and cultural goals. All of these factors contributed to a sub-optimal performance. The divisional leader, recognizing the need to realign the team members with each other and with the organization as a whole, created a team development journey to build faith that the team could perform well; surface the persistent, underlying issues undermining performance; and align the team with its major stakeholders, both internal and external.

Using team-coaching assessments, tools, and exercises, the team was able to turn things around. Not long after, the team had delivered on expectations, shaped a winning team culture, and aligned with stakeholders and company headquarters. With those strengths, they managed to head off significant unforeseen challenges: the economy, Covid-19 disruption, and societal unrest. Finally, the team established a strong working contract and game plan, first in the division and then with the broader organization and external stakeholders. The plan is essentially a working contract, with “Bes” describing ideal behaviors and mindsets; “Dos” describing their big bets and organizational actions; and “Haves” describing the desired results. The team has since cemented its consistently improved performance.3

Going back to basics: Shared purpose, shared leadership, and open communication

Building transparency around the team’s unique role and shared purpose as well as about why each person is on the team will reinforce the value of each individual and build a sense of belonging. A shipping company that had been acquired by a private equity firm, for example, comprised of a large number of different businesses; to meet the new owner’s goals and ambitious growth targets required cross selling. But the existing leadership team consisted of people who had always been rewarded for running their own businesses. The PE investors made it clear that this dynamic would no longer work. However, at first, the CEO of the largest business fought the shift—his identity was too tied up in his particular role. But through coaching and aligning on the shared organizational purpose, he was able to see that he had a strong operational leader to take the business unit forward and that his value to the business was in building the relationships and connections across the business.

By letting go, he was able to step up and take on a cross-company client relationship role, which was the beginning of a larger set of shifts on the  leadership team including the formation of a small, central team focused on the transformation to a customer-centered model and a shared purpose to meet the new goals and ambitions.

At a pharmaceutical company formed through a merger, several leaders of similar workstreams were brought together to determine how their work could contribute to the strategic goals of the new organization. But most of the leaders saw their role on this joint team not as an opportunity but as the price they had to pay for maintaining their other leadership role. It took a push from the new CEO to focus on the market opportunities—and competitive threats—in their area to convince the displeased leaders to work together to set a direction, goals, and accountability for reaching those goals. With that newly aligned shared purpose and an understanding of what each team member brought to the team, the leaders were able to push forward together a new culture of collaboration, communication, and talent development, actively seeking input from each other to improve and accelerate their outcomes.

Conclusion

A diverse range of perspectives and capabilities are more essential to business success than ever. Companies that develop their leaders with the notion that their success depends on all the players working as a team will give themselves a running start on not only developing but retaining the leaders they need now and in the future.4

About the authors

Alex Libson (alibson@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ Philadelphia office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

TA Mitchell (tmitchell@heidrick.com) is a principal in the London office and a member of the product management team.

Mark Watt (mwatt@heidrick.com) is a partner in the Johannesburg office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

References

1 Heidrick & Struggles proprietary survey of 250 executives in six countries conducted online in spring 2023.

2Cynthia Emrich, Steven Krupp, and Amy Miller, “Developing future-ready leaders: From assessments to strategically aligned learning,” Heidrick & Struggles.

3 For more on how purposeful leadership and personal change drive culture change in organizations, see Rose Gailey and Ian Johnston, Future-Focused: Shape Your Culture. Shape Your Future, Chicago: Networlding Publishing, 2021.

4 To evaluate the factors that are helping or hindering the acceleration of your team’s performance, see the Team Accelerator Questionnaire.

Related Services & Industries

Leadership Development

Team Acceleration

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Leadership Development

Building long-term resilience in consumer markets: A conversation with Aku Vikström, CEO of Orkla Foods Europe

Aku Vikström, CEO of a pan-Nordic branded food supplier, shares how leaders can build long-term success and resilience in consumer markets during times of macroeconomic disruption.

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings