Fortune 100 CEOs & Executives | How Diverse is CEO Succession

Identified Country:

The composition of Fortune 100 executive teams: How diverse is the CEO succession pipeline at leading companies?
Explore this page View the full infographicLooking forward ReferenceRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Chief Executive Officer The composition of Fortune 100 executive teams: How diverse is the CEO succession pipeline at leading companies?

Heidrick & Struggles research shows low levels of gender and ethnic diversity in key internal pathways to the CEO role, suggesting that it will be challenging to increase diversity among Fortune 100 CEOs in the medium term.

Heidrick & Struggles

View the full infographic

Seventy-eight percent of the CEOs of current Fortune 100 companies were promoted internally. In recent years at the largest companies around the world, that share has been rising. The fact that boards are increasingly seeing value in internally appointed CEOs means that a large number of future CEOs are already part of their company’s current leadership teams.

As boards continue to focus on diversity in terms of gender and race or ethnicity—among their many other requirements and preferences for CEOs—understanding how diverse today’s executive teams are offers a useful benchmark for how diverse the CEO role may be in five to 10 years.

View the full infographic.

CFO, COO, and head of division are by far the most frequent steppingstones to the CEO role; 66% of current Fortune 100 CEOs had one of these three as their previous position. There are 527 executives (35% of all executives) currently in these three roles; 20% are women, and 16% are people of color. This is progress from 2020, when 16% were women and 13% people of color.

As boards appoint more CEOs with less common areas of executive experience, they may tap into roles and functions with greater ranges of diversity. Among the new CEOs at the largest companies around the world, only 20% had C-suite experience other than CEO, CFO, or COO, similar to the 19% in 2021.1 But when boards do move beyond the most frequent steppingstones to find a CEO, they will also often give themselves more diverse options in terms of gender and race or ethnicity.

Looking forward

The low levels of gender and ethnic diversity in key internal pathways to the CEO role suggest that it will be challenging to increase diversity among Fortune 100 CEOs in the medium term. This is also true when it comes to board diversity, as our research found that these roles are also some of the most frequent executive backgrounds among people taking seats on Fortune 500 boards.

Companies give themselves the best chance at developing the most robust executive succession talent pools when they extend the strategic rigor of their CEO succession processes far deeper into the organization than most do today, treat executive development and succession planning as a core part of their overall talent retention strategy, and put in place tailored development programs to support the leaders they expect they will need today and in the future. Here are three questions to get started:

Is your CEO and executive succession planning identifying potential leaders across all functions, and deep into the organization?
Does your CEO and executive succession planning process consider multiple scenarios across a number of time horizons?
Is your CEO and executive succession planning process complemented by a tailored leadership development, transition, and onboarding for each CEO and potential CEO?

Reference

1 Route to the Top, Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Inclusive Leadership

Leadership Development

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top US 2026 | Closing the CEO capability gap

Fortune 500 companies are increasingly appointing new CEOs who have prior experience in the role. However, a new survey finds that more than a third of US companies still don’t have a CEO with the capabilities the company needs to succeed in the near term. Some companies are planning their CEO successions more comprehensively and seeing greater success.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings