2024 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2024 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Private Equity 2024 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey

Our latest survey includes a review of 2023 and early 2024 activity in North American private equity, our thoughts on the major hiring trends for operating professionals, and a deep dive into current compensation packages for operating professionals.
June 26, 2024

Jonathan Goldstein ,
John Rubinetti

For full compensation data, download the full report.

Welcome to our 2024 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey. Together with our survey of private equity investment professionals, this report provides a comprehensive picture of the compensation that North American private equity (PE) executives are currently receiving.

For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled compensation and organization data from a survey of 251 private equity operating professionals in the United States.

We hope you enjoy reading the survey. As always, suggestions are welcome, so please feel free to contact us—or your Heidrick & Struggles representative—with questions and comments.

Executive summary

This year’s survey includes a review of 2023 and early 2024 activity in North American private equity, our thoughts on the major hiring trends for operating professionals, and a deep dive into current compensation packages for operating professionals.

Expertise trends (page 8)

Twenty percent of the respondents considered themselves to be industry generalists; the most common specialist categories were technology/software (19%) and industrial (16%).
Generalists were most common in the breakdown of functional expertise as well, at 23%, followed by focus areas in sales (15%), marketing (14%), and finance (14%).
Twenty-seven percent of respondents had been management consultants in their immediate prior role, and only 17% had been a CEO—a significant drop from the 26% who reported they had been a CEO in our 2022 survey.1
Twenty-one percent had been PE operating executives, a significant increase from the 2022 respondents’ 7%.2
Only 12% had been previously employed by a portfolio company of their current GP or investment advisor—a drop from 27% in 2022.3

Cash compensation trends (page 12)

Between 2022 and 2023, base salary increased modestly, with nearly 60% of respondents who reported an increase seeing $50,000 or less. A notable 7.8% of respondents said that their bonus decreased between 2022 and 2023.
Between 2023 and 2024, respondents more often saw no change in their compensation; of those that did report an increase (45%), the majority, 79%, saw an increase of $50,000 or less.

Non-cash compensation trends (page 32)

The vast majority of respondents eligible for carried interest see it vest on a straight-line schedule.
Solid majorities of respondents at all professional levels reported that they have co-investment rights. Whether co-investment rights are based on the performance of funds or individual deals varies by seniority, with the highest fund-based participation reported by firm leaders (73%).

The growing importance of the PE operating professional

2023 was the worst year for combined PE deal activity in the United States since 2016.4 According to PitchBook, “Selling activity fell to its lowest point in over a decade, [and] PE capital deployed in the United States declined by a sobering 29.5% on the year while value derived from US exits fell by 26.4%. … A snapback in exit activity is what’s needed to spark a broad-based recovery in PE dealmaking, which is now entering its third year of decline.”5

As private equity has become a more significant part of the economy, and particularly as exit activity has dropped off, demand for operating executives in North America continues to increase as more and more firms are seeking to drive value creation over longer time periods. Firms’ methods for deploying these executives, however, vary widely and are evolving the roles, responsibilities, and compensation for the operating professionals.

Our survey found that 21% of respondents had been PE operating executives prior to their current role, a significant increase from only 7% of respondents in 2022.

Firms are, however, increasing their flexibility about the backgrounds of their operating executives. As noted previously, our survey found that only 12% had been previously employed by a portfolio company of their current GP or investment advisor—a drop from 27% in 2022—and only 17% had been a CEO, a significant drop from the 26% in 2022. And, as operating teams are being formed or strengthened, we are seeing more of an interest in functional specialties: finance, particularly, as well as human capital, technology, and go-to-market professionals.

What’s most important is that we have seen many different models of success. We have found that the most crucial element determining success of the team is buy-in from the investment professionals.

Looking ahead, based on our ongoing discussions with leaders in the sector, we expect to see demand for operators continue to grow and as well as increasing professionalization for the PE industry as a whole.

About the authors

Jonathan Goldstein (jgoldstein@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Private Equity Practice for the Americas; he is based in the New York office.

John Rubinetti (jrubinetti@heidrick.com) is a partner in the New York office and a member of the Private Equity Practice.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Mohd Arsalan for his contributions to this report.

References

1 2022 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey, Heidrick & Struggles, p. 5.

2 2022 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey, Heidrick & Struggles, p. 5.

3 2022 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey, Heidrick & Struggles, p. 5.

4 PitchBook, 2023 Annual US PE Breakdown, January 2024, p. 4.

5 PitchBook, 2023 Annual US PE Breakdown, January 2024, p. 4.

Related Services & Industries

Private Equity

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings