2023 Middle East Technology Officers Compensation Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2023 Middle East Technology Officers Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

AI & Technology Officers 2023 Middle East Technology Officers Compensation Survey

Our first annual survey of technology officers in the Middle East examines both organizational structure and compensation for this increasingly critical role.

Tom Clarke

Read the full report

Welcome to Heidrick & Struggles’ first annual Middle East Technology Officers Compensation Survey, which examines both organizational structure and compensation for this increasingly critical role.

For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled organizational and compensation data from a survey fielded in March of 2023 of 47 technology leaders based in the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Bahrain. In the coming years, we expect to be able to report further on additional countries with an expanded sample size. Most respondents carried the title of chief technology & digital officer, but respondents also include chief information officers, chief digital officers, and other senior information security executives.

We hope you enjoy reading the report, which is the only one of its kind covering organizational structure and compensation data. As always, suggestions are welcome, so please feel free to contact us with questions and comments.

Market overview

In 2022, inflation hit already expensive markets, many with growing populations and existing mandates to develop and advance the economy. We are seeing that leadership talent is scarce in the region, leading to relatively high compensation. In our experience, most executives in this region are ex-pats, and the region more often attracts those more senior in their careers with, in at least some cases, a different risk appetite than more junior executives.

In that context, the evolution of compensation packages is ongoing. The UAE, where the majority of our survey respondents are based, has seen GDP growth of 3.9% since 2021.1

Part of the evolution in compensation structure is the discontinuation of some allowances. Historically, companies offered allowances such as housing, transportation, and education to both locals and ex-pats to entice them to the region. As the markets have matured, we have seen these allowances be eliminated or reduced, or bundled into the fixed element of compensation.

The most commonly held role among our respondents was a dual role: chief digital & technology officer. Executives with these areas of expertise are becoming increasingly important, as organizations across all industries are facing the challenge of adapting to a variety of tech-based efficiencies, most recently generative AI. In our most recent survey of chief information security officers (CISOs), we found that these roles also often have information security responsibilities. Fifty-three percent of CISOs surveyed said they reported to either the chief information officer, the chief technology officer, or another senior engineering executive.2

We believe that compensation structures will continue to evolve in the region as countries continue to transform. This evolution will require the expertise of global leading technology professionals. One specific area in which we think further development is required is the more common use of long-term incentive plans (LTIPs). LTIPs are common in major technology markets, however, they are occasional across the Middle East region. We feel that they will become much more frequent in years to come as organizations in the region seek to retain their core functional leaders.

With further economic growth forecast for 2023, we are excited to track the evolution of compensation designs for technology leaders in the region.

For full compensation data, download the full report.

About the author

Tom Clarke (tclarke@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Dubai office and a member of the global Technology & Services, Technology Officers, and Digital Officers practices.

References

1 “GDP growth annual %) - United Arab Emirates,” The World Bank, data.worldbank.org.

2 Matt Aiello, Scott Thompson, Max Randria, Camilla Reventlow, Guy Shaul, and Adam Vaughan, 2022 Global Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) Survey, Heidrick & Struggles.

Related Services & Industries

AI & Technology Officers

Related Content

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Financial Officers

Crypto and digital assets focus: Finding the right leaders for a maturing sector

Crypto is a high-stakes market, and competition for capital, customers, and talent is brutal. Crypto companies should look for four crucial capabilities in their leaders.

Frontier Tech

2025 Global Chief Information Security Officer Compensation Survey

Our sixth annual global survey of CISOs reveals how CISOs’ pay, reporting lines, and AI mandates are evolving as cybersecurity becomes a CEO-level, enterprise-wide priority.

Frontier Tech

2025 Data, Analytics, and Artificial Intelligence Officers Compensation Survey

Our fifth annual report examines compensation for executives with artificial intelligence or data analytics responsibilities.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings