Who are the chairs of Australia’s top public companies? | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Who are the chairs of Australia’s top public companies?
Explore this page Read the full reportHow to enhance ASX 50 chair succession planning to meet the futureAbout the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Board of Directors Who are the chairs of Australia’s top public companies?

A closer look at the chairs of ASX 50 public companies

Guy Farrow

Read the full report

Over the past few years, Australian businesses have had to manage both the impacts of relentless global crises including COVID-19 and the war in Ukraine as well as challenges closer to home including changes in political governance and a rising cost of living. The effects of these disruptions on business have been swift: for example, due to the pandemic, remote work has gained significant ground and companies’ ability to attract talent is tied more than ever to how they approach sustainability, flexibility, inclusion, and employee wellbeing. As in many countries around the world, a new license to operate is taking hold for Australian businesses, in part due to the increased societal expectation that business leaders should step in and help solve problems that governments cannot tackle alone.

Boards and chairs must be ready to guide their companies in meeting these new expectations through what is likely to be a volatile future. In many conversations with chairs around the world, these leaders have emphasized that they want to be connected to external events as much as internal processes, keep up with macro trends, be able to listen to what their stakeholders are telling them, and thoroughly understand and be able to evaluate new threats and opportunities.

In that context, this article examines the backgrounds of the chairs of ASX 50 companies. We found a rather traditional profile: most are men with CEO backgrounds and previous chair experience. (This is similar to Fortune 50 companies, at which 92% of chairs are men and 80% have CEO experience.1) Chairs with this type of experience bring deep expertise to the table. But, as new considerations take hold, we believe that boards will benefit from broadening their horizons as part of rethinking their succession planning approach; this will help boards prepare for multiple scenarios and time horizons.

For the full data, download the PDF.

How to enhance ASX 50 chair succession planning to meet the future

Frequently review and update the desired profile of the next chair. Boards should determine the proper mix of more traditional executive experience and newer areas of experience needed for the next phase of their company and be clear about must-haves and options necessary for different future scenarios. In addition, we believe that as boards are expected to meet a more complex set of expectations, they will need to pay equal attention to both hard experience and the softer side of potential chairs’ leadership capabilities, such as curiosity or agility, to ensure boards are inclusive and effective. In our experience, too many boards still, in the end, make their choice of chair based on yesterday’s criteria.2
Broaden the criteria. Keeping in mind the skills and experiences of which their company is most in need, boards should otherwise open their criteria to a wider pool of candidate backgrounds and experiences. Women less often have previous chair, board, or CEO experience, for example, but many companies will likely already have a number of directors on their boards with these backgrounds; therefore, it may be that bringing in a chair without that experience will still lead to the board members having complementary skill sets.
Expand the search to less traditional sources. Many companies are still hiring chairs through networking and familiarity, but those willing to consider candidates including, for example, chairs from other industries, will enrich their options considerably.
Ensure an inclusive board culture. The role of the chair will be more appealing to a wider range of candidates if the candidates feel they will be able to sustain a safe space in which everyone can contribute and engage in robust debate and problem-solving. Board chairs can begin to ensure an inclusive board culture by understanding its current culture and setting up regular board effectiveness reviews to assess and help maintain a thriving board culture.

However, as the business license to operate keeps changing along with new demands and considerations for boards, we believe that in order to be fit for the future, boards will derive value from rethinking their succession planning approach to reflect multiple scenarios and time horizons. When it comes to chairs, that means a larger, more diverse pool of candidates who can step in when their leadership skills make them the right fit for the role.

About the author

Guy Farrow (gfarrow@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Sydney and Melbourne offices and regional managing partner of the CEO & Board of Directors Practice in Asia Pacific and the Middle East.

References

1Alice Breeden and Bonnie Gwin, “A look at leading board chairs today,” Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.  2Alice Breeden and Bonnie Gwin, “The chair imperative: A new mandate for leading in a new world,” Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

Inclusive Leadership

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings