Transformation in financial services: Succeeding with new leadership roles to thrive in the new normal | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Transformation in financial services: Succeeding with new leadership roles to thrive in the new normal
Explore this page New leadership roles: Defining and hiringIncluding the teamAbout the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Financial Services Transformation in financial services: Succeeding with new leadership roles to thrive in the new normal

Financial services firms are creating unprecedented numbers of new executive roles. When leaders consider not only the role itself but also how it will affect the existing team, these executives succeed more often.

Ellen Maag ,
Katherine Pluck ,
Todd Taylor

Financial services, like most industries, has been in a period of significant innovation since the COVID-19 pandemic began affecting business operations, and many firms are now seeing growth opportunities in markets that have been reshaped in large part by the increased pace of the shift to digital as well as changing consumer preferences.

For many firms, this has meant adding new leadership roles. Indeed, in the year between the summer of 2020 and the summer of 2021, Heidrick & Struggles saw that the share of roles financial services firms were seeking to fill that were new rose from 41% to 59%.1 Sometimes these roles are for leaders of new businesses; other times they are roles in existing businesses that emphasize a newly important mix of skills—one example is combining sales, marketing, and product expertise into a chief commercial officer role. Either way, financial firms and companies across industries are also putting increased emphasis on finding and developing leaders who not only focus on results but are agile, empathetic, inclusive, and able to solve problems in new ways. In other words, they are often filling new roles with new kinds of leaders. (For additional context on finding and developing leaders, see “Developing future-ready leaders,” and “Future-ready leaders: Finding effective leaders who can grow with your company.”)

In the year between the summer of 2020 and the summer of 2021, Heidrick & Struggles saw that the share of roles financial services firms were seeking to fill that were new rose from 41% to 59%.1

All this means that most financial services firms—through planning or by default—are changing the mix of capabilities on their leadership teams. Based on our experience, we see that most firms would benefit from asking more questions, not only about which new roles are needed and why, but also how those new roles should work in relation to the rest of the executive team in terms of structure and capabilities. Leaders who get this right will not only see immediate benefit but positively reshape their pipeline planning for the longer term.

New leadership roles: Defining and hiring

Leadership roles for a new business

The context of a new leadership role is straightforward when the leader will be leading a new business. These leaders typically need hard skills such as experience in fast-growth businesses and digital expertise—and we have seen that those are firms’ highest priority in filling these roles. Where we see less focus is on ensuring the new leader has both the capabilities to build a new business and to build support for that business in the rest of the organization.

Digital skills are often at the core of new leadership roles. In addition to digital expertise, Heidrick & Struggles research has identified four leadership capabilities that are most common among leaders seen as having impact today and potential for tomorrow (through the lens of our model for organizational acceleration, META—or mobilize, execute, and transform with agility).

The four capabilities we have identified are leading through influence, driving execution, creating possibilities from new thinking, and having an ownership mindset. When taken together, these allow leaders to build strong, trusting, and inclusive relationships across their firms, which helps their new ideas get heard and supports resilience on their teams. (For more, see “Developing future-ready leaders.”)

For leaders of new businesses, financial services organizations would do well to focus particularly on people who can drive execution with an ownership mindset and have the influencing skills that are required to build support for their business in the rest of the organization.

Leadership roles for an existing business

When a new role is created in an existing business to meet new needs or support a shift in strategic focus, the context can be more complicated. These roles include, for example, chief commercial officers who bring together sales, marketing, and product functions to ensure a sharper focus on customer needs; chief analytics officers who bring together previously disparate sources of internal data to create better insights; and, of course, leaders with digital expertise, particularly, in financial services, for supporting omnichannel customer service. In all of these cases, all or parts of existing teams and functions will have new reporting lines and new responsibilities. This will often mean a strategic shift from focusing on execution to focusing on transformation. Making it work requires leaders who can manage change and create support for the new ways of working. Yet here, too, we often see firms pay more attention to the hard skills of executing than to the softer leadership capabilities of transformation.

In addition to creating possibilities from new thinking, other important aspects of transformative leadership are leading change and collaborating across boundaries, which are particularly important for leaders in this kind of situation.

Including the team

Even when firms consider the full mix of skills and capabilities needed for a new leadership role, they often don’t consider how that new leader will affect the rest of the executive team in terms of culture and other team members’ capabilities. For example, if a new leader is particularly, and appropriately, focused on inspiring transformation, others in the function may need to increase their focus on execution and working with agility in a new context. Getting this right will often require starting by having each team member complete an assessment of their own capabilities. Leaders can then aggregate that into a team view that identifies synergies and gaps in the team’s collective leadership capabilities. This data can then be used to align new roles and responsibilities or inform the senior leader of future talent needs to develop or acquire in the medium term.

That said, firms should also carefully consider new reporting lines in order to ensure the new leadership team is effective from the start.

When firms think about and approach the composition of their leadership teams this way, they are necessarily looking deeper into their leadership pipeline through the lens of strategy and current leadership, thinking hard about both hard skills and softer leadership capabilities. This ensures that they are building better pipelines for leadership development.

As financial services firms seek new leaders to navigate the markets reshaped by COVID-19 and changing digital and customer expectations, existing leaders should consider not only the new role itself but also how it will affect the existing executive team. Firms that manage their leadership teams and decisions in this way will not only see immediate benefits but transform their leadership pipeline for years to come.

About the authors

Ellen Maag (emaag@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Washington D.C. office where she leads the Americas region of Heidrick Consulting’s Leadership Assessment and Development Center of Excellence.

Katherine Pluck (kpluck@heidrick.com) is a principal in the New York office and a member of the Financial Services Practice.

Todd Taylor (ttaylor@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of the Financial Services Practice; he is based in the New York office.

References

1  Internal Heidrick & Struggles data.

Related Services & Industries

AI & Technology Officers

Financial Services

Related Content

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

Financial Services

An interview with Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC)

In the fifth installment of our interview series on leadership in Japan’s growing asset management industry, Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC), discusses his transition from senior roles at multinational firms to leading a Japanese financial institution. He reflects on bridging global and local practices, shaping SGIC’s strategy and culture, and shares lessons learned as the company’s first external president.

Compensation Trends

2025 US Global Markets Compensation Survey

Our second annual US Global Markets Compensation Survey examines organization and compensation data from a survey of sales, trading, and research professionals in the United States.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings