2024 Private Equity–Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2024 Private Equity–Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Financial Officers 2024 Private Equity–Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Our third report on compensation trends for chief financial officers explores data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on both organizational structure and compensation for this increasingly critical role.
November 21, 2024

Susie Clements ,
Stephen Schwanhausser ,
Elizabeth P. Simpson ,
Sachi Vora

Read the full report

Welcome to our 2024 Private Equity–Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey, an analysis of compensation in both the United States and Europe for this critical role. Together with our surveys of PE-backed CEOs and PE investment and operating professionals around the world, these reports help to create a comprehensive picture of the compensation that key executives are currently receiving in a wide range of positions.

For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled compensation data from a survey fielded in summer 2024 of 317 senior financial officers, mostly in the United States and Europe. While most carried the title of chief financial officer (CFO), the survey group also included top or lead financial executives with other titles.

We hope you enjoy reading the survey, and we welcome suggestions, so please feel free to contact us questions and comments.

Key findings

As private equity has become a more significant part of the economy, and particularly as exit activity has dropped off, demand for experienced leaders for portfolio companies continues to increase as more and more firms are seeking to drive value creation over longer time periods. In that context:

It’s notable that two-thirds of respondents to this survey have 10 or fewer years of experience at PE-backed companies. This suggests that PE firms are continuing to increase their interest in leaders who have not previously worked at PE-backed companies.1
Compensation remains strong for CFOs at PE-backed companies, in base, bonus, and equity. Respondents in the United States with less than five years of CFO experience reported significantly higher total compensation, underscoring the increasing competitiveness even for first-time CFOs.
A notably higher share of respondents expect an exit in just one to two years than did so in our 2022 survey, suggesting that hold times may be shortening. In the longer run, that may affect the market.
Finally, the findings suggest that hybrid work models are here to stay and may be another incentive for at least some leaders: 69% of respondents are remote or hybrid, with only 18% saying that they are fully back in the office.

For more, download the full report.

About the authors

Alyse Bodine (abodine@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Philadelphia office and co-head of the Financial Officers Practice. She is also regional managing partner of the Corporate Officers Practice in the Americas.

Susie Clements (sclements@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ London office and regional managing partner of the Corporate Officers Practice in Europe & Africa.

Stephen Schwanhausser (sschwanhausser@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Stamford office and the global managing partner of the Private Equity Practice.

Elizabeth Simpson (esimpson@heidrick.com) is the partner in charge of the Heidrick & Struggles’ New York and Stamford offices and a member of the Financial Services and Financial Officers practices.

Sachi Vora (svora@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ New York office and co-head of the global Financial Officers Practice; she is also a member of the CEO & Board of Directors Practice.

Reference

1 We first noted this trend in relation to CFOs in our 2022 report. For more, see Alyse Bodine, Stephen Schwanhausser, and Elizabeth Simpson, 2022 Private Equity-Backed CFO Compensation Survey, Heidrick & Struggles, August 2, 2022, heidrick.com. For our most recent report examining CEOs at PE-backed companies, see Jeffrey Sanders and Stephen Schwanhausser, 2023 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey, Heidrick & Struggles, August 2, 2023, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

Financial Officers

Private Equity

Related Content

Human Resources Officers

Driving integration while maintaining cultures: Varian's head of HR on leading through an acquisition

Livia Freudl, head of HR at Varian, now a Siemens Healthineers company, discusses driving integration, maintaining company culture, and the role of HR in corporate sustainability and social responsibility.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings