Navigating fault lines: Leaders’ crucial capability for 2026 | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Navigating fault lines: Leaders’ crucial capability for 2026

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Inclusive Leadership Navigating fault lines: Leaders’ crucial capability for 2026

In an era of deep polarization, leaders can build trust and progress by enabling constructive engagement instead of taking sides—or staying silent.
February 26, 2026

Heidrick & Struggles

If you need advice or help in any way, please contact us.

Email us

The world around us is shifting rapidly and divides old and new are widening—in economies, societies, and organizations. Debates about when and how business leaders should respond to societal conflict affecting the communities they serve are taking place daily. The recent events in Minnesota that led to the deaths of two members of the community heightened many people’s focus on the topic.

In these situations, people on either side of the issues often call on companies to “take a stand.”

“Taking a stand” can be interpreted as choosing sides—and whatever issue a company and community are facing, the legal, reputational, and operational risks of choosing a side often prompt leaders to hesitate to act at all. It is true that each company will face moments that call for its leaders to take a side. But the most effective stand for leaders to take is enabling constructive engagement within the organization and among those with differing views. And that does not require advocacy for a specific position; in fact, taking sides often reduces the chances of constructive engagement.

Our research and work with leaders around the world suggest there is a far greater upside in creating the conditions in which people can bridge divides, and a far greater risk than many think in simply remaining silent, which can be construed as taking the side of the status quo. Nearly two-thirds of CEOs and directors across all major global markets report that the ability to lead constructively across boundaries is foundational to success—more important than operational skills and strategic ability—and a key driver of innovation and financial performance.1 The implication is clear: leadership teams should be adept at harnessing conflict, and that is never more important than in moments of heightened tension.

Why now?

As 2026 unfolds, the question is not whether leaders across the globe will face division, but how they will respond to it. These are defining moments, and many leaders don’t know where to start; in our third annual global CEO & Board Confidence Monitor, 79% of CEOs and board members who cited social polarization as a key issue reported limited confidence in their organizations’ ability to manage it. Leaders who set the conditions for and practice constructive engagement, even across the most difficult fault lines, build trust and create the conditions for progress.

Actions you can take

Agree on a framework. Decide which issues your organization will engage with based on your values and what is most material to your performance.
Scenario plan. Something will happen that affects your people and operations, but today’s volatility makes it hard to predict exactly what or when. Practice ahead of time so you’re ready to engage when you need to.
Set expectations for engagement in your everyday work. Find ways to talk about your organizational values and why engagement on topics that affect them matters to your organizational future. Role model constructive engagement, and reward others for participating.
When something happens, work back from the future to stress test your approach. As with any other strategic initiative, think about where you want to be as an organization five years from now. Make sure what you do operationally and what you say as a leadership team today won’t limit your options for getting there—as long as whatever you do or don’t do aligns with your organization’s values.

Our firm’s view on these subjects, which we call Leading across boundaries, is explored in “Leading across boundaries: Why CEOs and board members see this as a strategic asset,” a global study of over 500 directors and CEOs.

To dive further into how we approach this topic, visit Leading across boundaries: Our view.

Reference

1 Jeremy Hanson and Jonathan McBride, “Leading across boundaries: Why CEOs and board members see this capability as a strategic asset,” Heidrick & Struggles, October 7, 2025, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

Inclusive Leadership

Leadership Development

Performance Culture

Related Content

Leadership Development

Building long-term resilience in consumer markets: A conversation with Aku Vikström, CEO of Orkla Foods Europe

Aku Vikström, CEO of a pan-Nordic branded food supplier, shares how leaders can build long-term success and resilience in consumer markets during times of macroeconomic disruption.

Frontier Tech

Finding the human core of competitive advantage in the AI era: Avoiding the Pygmalion trap

As effective leadership becomes the most reliable source of value in the AI era, and as AI becomes ever more capable, leaders must understand why leadership itself remains a uniquely human capability.

Leadership Development

What great leaders learn from flawed leadership: A conversation with author Mita Mallick

Mita Mallick shares how experiences with poor leadership shaped her view on how great leaders can coach, not control, and lead with empathy and clarity.

AI & Technology Officers

Leading transformation in the space industry: A conversation with Kristina Wagner, chief technology officer and chief digital officer at OHB SE

Kristina Wagner discusses scaling change, growing next gen leaders, and bold career advice for women in STEM.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings