The evolution of Fortune 100 leadership teams, 2020 to 2022 | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

The evolution of Fortune 100 leadership teams, 2020 to 2022

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Leadership Succession Planning The evolution of Fortune 100 leadership teams, 2020 to 2022

To explore how leadership teams are changing, Heidrick & Struggles looked at the roles reporting to Fortune 100 CEOs as well as the backgrounds and experiences of the people in those roles.

Victoria S. Reese

Read the full article

Leadership teams constantly evolve, but the pace of change since early 2020 has been faster than ever. The challenges and opportunities shaping business during this period have created an environment of increased uncertainty, as more stakeholders are demanding their voices be heard and more is at risk for corporate leaders. To explore how leadership teams have changed in that context, Heidrick & Struggles looked at the roles reporting to Fortune 100 CEOs as well as the backgrounds and experiences of the people in those roles, in February 2020 and again in November 2022.

Our first notable finding was that 78% of the CEOs of current Fortune 100 companies were promoted internally, a trend we have seen increase in our Route to the Top study since 2017.1If this pattern of internal promotion continues, many future CEOs are likely already part of their current leadership teams. Furthermore, between 2020 and 2022, we saw an increase in the share of Fortune 100 CEOs who were first-time CEOs as well as those who had more diversified backgrounds than CEOs appointed earlier, particularly in areas of previous C-suite experience, highlighting that boards are broadening their understanding of what experience qualifies candidates for the CEO role.

A second notable finding was a significant increase in the size of Fortune 100 executive teams since February 2020. This increase in team size is proving an excellent opportunity for companies to strengthen their leadership pipeline and may also deepen the succession pools for both CEO and board roles.2

The increasing size and scope of leadership teams is also reinforcing the importance of senior leaders—meaning that boards must focus on retaining promising leaders at all levels through strategic, transparent executive succession planning and career development.

Key findings

Many future CEOs are likely already part of their current leadership teams: 78% of the CEOs of current Fortune 100 companies were promoted internally.
There was a 48% increase in the number of executives on Fortune 100 leadership teams between February 2020 and November 2022, from 1,006 to 1,489.
This translated to an increase in the average size of the leadership team, from 10 to 15 people.
This increase in team size is proving an excellent opportunity for companies to strengthen their leadership pipeline and may also deepen the succession pools for both CEO and board roles.
Of the 91 companies that were in the Fortune 100 in both 2020 and 2022, 69% added new roles to their leadership teams, 20% kept the same size leadership team, and 11% eliminated roles. Although the overall number of roles increased notably, the relative shares of P&L roles and functional roles stayed about the same.
Forty percent of the executives on the 2020 leadership teams are no longer in their roles.
Turnover was higher among underrepresented groups: almost half of the women and over half of the Asian, Black, and Hispanic or Latino executives on the current leadership teams were appointed after 2020.
Out of all appointments after 2020, 68% were white and, coincidentally, 68% were men.
Furthermore, by 2022, men more often retained the same role they had in 2020, while women were more often new appointments.
In terms of the functions added to and removed from leadership teams, quality, assurance, and compliance were most often added, while strategy, operations, and commercial were most often removed.

To read the full article, open or download the PDF.

About the authors

Alyse Bodine (abodine@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of the Financial Officers Practice; she is based in Heidrick & Struggles’ Philadelphia office.

Victoria Reese (vreese@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of the Corporate Officers Practice; she is based in the New York office.

References

1 Route to the Top, Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

2 For more on how the growing leadership team size creates opportunities for diversity, see “The composition of Fortune 100 executive teams: How diverse is the CEO succession pipeline at leading companies?” Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Inclusive Leadership

Leadership Development

Related Content

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Healthcare & Life Sciences

MedTech focus: The rise of the strategy & corporate development function

MedTech companies are increasingly embracing the strategy or corporate development chief role. Insights from companies that have found leaders for this critical function offer a blueprint for recruiting this talent.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on sitting CEOs at the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings