Succession planning focus: How industrial companies are revving up their processes | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Succession planning focus: How industrial companies are revving up their processes
Explore this page About the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Industrial Succession planning focus: How industrial companies are revving up their processes

Current CEOs share their insights on how forward-looking CEOs and boards are rethinking their approach to CEO succession planning to ensure their company’s next leader will have the best chance of success.

Jonathan M. Graham

It’s very unusual for CEOs to be engaged in scheduling issues, supply chain issues, at a third-tier supplier—it’s never done. But now, if you don’t get in there and make sure all the CEOs in that chain understand it’s fundamental to your business, you’ll fail.
- John Garrison, president and CEO of Terex

I have more bosses than I’ve ever had in my life: shareholders, the board, our employees and communities.
- Dave Burritt, president and CEO of U.S. Steel

People’s own personal circumstances, and so many things around them, have changed, and the company needs to adapt along the way.
- Sundaram Nagarajan, president and CEO of Nordson Corporation

Today’s environment demands that CEOs be able to address the different stakeholders around corporate social responsibility, including diversity and social justice and sustainability; they must be able to operate in those spheres now.
- Evan Smith, president and CEO of Hypertherm

Will [external candidates] fit and embrace the culture? They have to meet the goal of profit, but where will they spend their time?
- Dave Burritt, president and CEO of U.S. Steel

The past several years have rattled companies across industries and sectors. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, skyrocketing inflation, and the devastating war in Ukraine have taken a vast humanitarian toll while also, among many other effects, straining supply chains and raising concerns about globalization in the context of current and future geopolitical risks. These issues are particularly pressing for industrial companies, which have increasingly relied on parts and plants all over the world. John Garrison, president and CEO of Terex, explained that “it’s very unusual for CEOs to be engaged in scheduling issues, supply chain issues, at a third-tier supplier—it’s never done. But now, if you don’t get in there and make sure all the CEOs in that chain understand it’s fundamental to your business, you’ll fail.”

Supply chain challenges may be most industrial CEOs’ biggest current challenge but, like most CEOs, they are also facing a range of new and pressing concerns. Economic volatility and societal shifts that have brought diversity, equity, and inclusion (DE&I) and sustainability to the fore of both customers’ and stakeholders’ concerns are bringing more issues—and stakeholders—than ever to the top of CEOs’ agendas. More is at stake, more is uncertain, and more stakeholders expect more. Leadership across boundaries is necessary.

Forward-looking CEOs and boards are rethinking how they approach CEO succession planning to ensure their next leader will have the capabilities to lead effectively in the near future. Insights from four current industrial CEOs suggest that for them this means focusing more than ever on leadership capabilities such as curiosity and agility, as well as on specific skill sets, prioritizing people and culture, knowing their values, and starting succession planning earlier, thinking more broadly and comprehensively about needs and trade-offs.

The capabilities of tomorrow’s industrial CEOs

Of course, it’s always been the case that companies don’t know what their next challenge is going to be, but we are living in a particularly tumultuous time. “What do we need for the future?” asked Dave Burritt, president and CEO of U.S. Steel. “No one knows, especially in these times. Crises are coming faster and are more disruptive globally.” At the same time, as Sundaram Nagarajan, president and CEO of Nordson Corporation, put it, “as a first-time CEO, I have more bosses than I ever had in my life: shareholders, the board, our employees and communities.”

Build and support agility

Under these circumstances, companies and their leaders must be nimble. They need to be able to react quickly as new threats and challenges arise. “We have to modify plans at speed,” said Terex’s Garrison. And beyond that, leaders must be comfortable not knowing what’s next. “The ability to deal with ambiguity, both strategically and tactically, is more important than experience. Will supply chain jams change? How should geopolitical risk be factored into business strategy?” Garrison asked. CEOs need to be able to embrace this ambiguity and navigate with agility as challenges arise and shift.

While many companies have increased their focus on agility over the past decade, industrial companies, on the whole, have been slow to change. By nature, leaders at these companies tend to be methodical, logical, and careful. In normal times, this serves them well. But in an environment rife with upheaval and change, agility is key. (For more on developing agility in leaders, see “Agility for the long term.”).

Prioritize people and culture

While much of the world has gone remote or hybrid over the past couple of years, many industrial companies have been split: those on the front line never stopped working on site while people in office roles very often worked from their homes. Industrial company CEOs today are dealing with tension between people who lack the option to be remote and those who are resisting returning to a physical workspace. Being clear that they prioritize their people, CEOs suggest, is key.

“You have to align yourself with your employees—even more than aligning with the customers—because they are now running the show in terms of where they want to work and how they want to work,” said U.S. Steel’s Burritt. “CEOs have to let employees create an environment in which they can be most effective. Without this trust, people will leave. Focus on employees, who then take care of the customers, who then take care of the stockholders—it’s a virtuous cycle.”

The volatility of the world is also putting pressure on CEOs to focus on these areas. “People’s own personal circumstances, and so many things around them, have changed, and the company needs to adapt along the way,” said Nordson’s Nagarajan. The CEO needs to think about what it means to support its people and uphold the culture in this environment, as U.S. Steel’s Burritt explained: “They have to meet the goal of profit, but where will they spend time?” The answer, he said, is “having virtual interactions with everyone, keeping everyone aligned, supporting projects to help develop people on that path—you can’t go wrong with a focus on the people.”

Know your values

More than ever, the world is calling on companies to know and live their values—and to include in those values DE&I and sustainability. But this can pose a particular challenge for industrial companies—DE&I in particular. Industrial companies have long been male-dominated; the percentage of women in the industry’s workforce has hovered around 30% percent for decades1 and the share of female CEOs at the world’s largest listed industrial companies was 4% in 20212 in Fortune 100 industrial companies, only 17% of direct reports to the CEO are racial or ethnic minorities. These situations are no longer acceptable to an increasing number of stakeholders, and lack of progress is decisively shifting from being a reputational risk to putting access to capital at risk.

As they look for and develop their successors, industrial CEOs need to find people who will take these imperatives—and threats—seriously, and can find the right approach to meeting them through a commitment to values. As Evan Smith, president and CEO of Hypertherm, said, “Today’s environment demands that CEOs be able to address the different stakeholders around corporate social responsibility, including diversity and social justice and sustainability; they must be able to operate in those spheres now.” Terex CEO Garrison added that “There is no equivalence to five years ago. We need to blend the business needs of today with the need to improve our environmental footprint and our products.”

Knowing their values will help leaders adapt and react to the shifting landscape. According to U.S. Steel CEO Burritt, “CEOs need to have a heightened sense of their values so that when something comes up, they don’t have to think deeply—they just follow the rules, and do it from a company perspective, not a personal perspective. Pivot back to the principles and what we’re doing with our employees.” Nordson’s Nagarajan relates the story of how he considered his response to an email from an employee about one of the company’s DE&I policies, saying it’s important to “Consider what you as a person and what as a company you care about. The company must reflect the environment around it to build the best competitive position we can with the talent available in the market. So, for example, I have to be more open in my own thinking. It’s not easy, you just have to balance.”

Starting sooner to identify the right leader

Best practice companies across industries are starting succession planning sooner and digging deeper internally than ever before. At industrial companies, where leaders are particularly used to planning over long timeframes in areas such as building plants or other infrastructure, this is a matter of applying familiar principles in a new area. (To learn more about how a manufacturing mindset helped many industrial companies improve their DE&I performance, see “Enhancing diversity: The manufacturing mindset advantage.”) Hypertherm’s Smith explained that “the cadence can change depending on how close succession is, but succession is part of the CEOs ongoing priorities and board process. And it can’t just be pro forma, it needs to be meaningful cultivation and development. To be a truly sustainable organization, we have to pull off succession gracefully, and that takes long-term planning.” U.S. Steel’s Burritt noted that succession planning is “a much higher priority now than it was when I became CEO,” in 2017. “There is more of a rhythm than there used to be; it’s more like board succession.”

Now, in addition to it being part of the board’s remit, the succession planning responsibility is increasingly falling to the current CEO as well. Today’s CEOs believe they haven’t been successful if they don’t have a bench of potential successors. Said Nordson’s Nagarajan, “We are building a strategy to deliver long-term, profitable growth now that will live past the current leadership team and me. With this in mind, we are cultivating a talent pipeline that is best positioned to lead the company forward with this growth strategy.”

Indeed, the question of looking for a successor internally or externally is a perennial one—and the answer is always subject to the unique context of a given company. Regardless of which way they ultimately go, many industrial CEOs and boards today are focusing on cultivating internal talent so that those options exist. “I will do my best to develop an internal candidate,” Nordson’s Nagarajan said. “If you’re thinking about the company’s current needs plus its future needs, you’ll make different choices than you would have if you only thought about the current needs.” However, as all the CEOs we spoke to stressed, context matters. One consideration, Terex’s Garrison said, “is what level of change is required going forward. An external candidate may be more willing to create change than an internal one.” But U.S. Steel’s Burritt emphasized caution with regard to external candidates: “Will they fit and embrace the culture? They have to meet the goal of profit, but where will they spend their time?”

Questions for boards and CEOs

As they juggle these considerations and plan their approach, industrial CEOs and boards can ask themselves a number of questions to ensure they’re setting their companies on the right path:

Have we aligned on the characteristics and capabilities most important today and tomorrow? Do we reassess regularly? Have we incorporated scenario planning into our strategy and succession planning discussions?
Have we made succession planning a priority and built it into regular conversations?
Can we address succession planning in the context of risk mitigation? Where does it sit in those discussions?
Have we taken the expectations of all stakeholders into consideration? Have we openly communicated our commitment to succession planning?
Is the current CEO leading succession planning discussions?
Who within our company is ready now, who will be ready in the next couple of years, and who should we watch for the future? How can we support development at each stage? How often do we reassess readiness?
How are we making diversity and inclusion a priority?

About the author

Jonathan M. Graham (jgraham@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Chicago and New York offices and the global managing partner of the Industrial Practice.

Acknowledgments

The author wishes to thank the following executives for sharing their insights: Dave Burritt, president and CEO, U.S. Steel; John Garrison, president and CEO, Terex; Sundaram Nagarajan, president and CEO, Nordson Corporation; and Evan Smith, President and CEO, Hypertherm. Their views are personal and do not necessarily represent those of the companies they are affiliated with.

References

1  Lynda Laughlin and Cheridan Christnacht, “Women in manufacturing,” United States Census Bureau, October 3, 2017, census.gov.

2  Route to the Top 2021, Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Industrial

Industrial Goods & Technology

Related Content

On-Demand Talent

Three forces reshaping building products leadership—and how interim leaders are filling the gap

Conversations at this year's NAHB International Builders' Show revealed three forces stretching executive bandwidth in building products: continuous M&A, the push for operational resilience, and the modernization of commercial models. The execution challenge is no longer whether leaders see the need to act—but how they resource and sequence the response.

Human Resources Officers

Chief people officer focus: Transforming HR across borders

Shirley Zhou, head of HR for ASP APAC & vice president of Fortive Asia, describes the evolution of her career and the value of taking a long-term perspective on people decisions, particularly in volatile environments.

CEO & Board of Directors

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden

Heidrick & Struggles’ Mohamad Turk and Jane Bargmann speak with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden, on leadership in a new cultural context and the capabilities needed to lead transformation in the fast-evolving Middle East market.

Leadership Development

Leadership assurance: How one company achieved a meaningful return on its investment in executive coaching

The experience of a heavy industrial company’s leadership team shows how executive coaching can create objective value.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings