Board Monitor Australia and New Zealand 2022 | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Board Monitor Australia and New Zealand 2022
Explore this page View the full infographicSee more Board Monitor 2022 reportsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Boards & Governance Board Monitor Australia and New Zealand 2022

In 2021, there was a decreased appetite in new appointments to board of ASX 200 and NZ 10 companies as well as an increase of seats going to active executives.

Heidrick & Struggles

View the full infographic

See more Board Monitor 2022 reports

As society and business are reconciling the events of the past three years, a new corporate license to operate is taking shape in many countries. Companies require a new, bolder type of leadership that is focused on organizational purpose, factors in the new demands from their workforce, and has “doing good while doing well” as a mantra. Boards must consider what new skills and experiences are necessary to future-proof themselves to lead companies in an increasingly uncertain environment.

To understand how the ASX 200 and NZ 10 board composition is changing to meet these new societal demands we analyzed the backgrounds of the new directors appointed each year since 2016. These are the key findings:

There is a decreased appetite in new appointments: there were 165 appointments in 2021, which is the second-lowest figure in six years
While there was an increase of seats going to directors who are still in active executive roles, that is still the lowest figure in all markets we analyzed
2021 appointments have kept the gender balance established since 2018, with 49% of the seats going to women

For the full demographic data, view the full infographic.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

Inclusive Leadership

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings