How to Succeed as a First-Time Chief People Officer | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

First-time chief people officers: A guide from current to future chief people officers

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Human Resources Officers First-time chief people officers: A guide from current to future chief people officers

The chief people officer (CPO) report outlines the step changes that people face when they get into the CPO role, some of which they may previously have considered, and others that fall far outside their sphere of experience.

Rachel Farley

Read the full report

The main themes emerging from our interviews are:

As CPO, you are now part of running the business. Sitting on the executive committee, working with the remuneration committee, reporting to the board, and building relationships with the chair and CEO are all significant steps up from the responsibilities of the HR director.
The realization that you’re on your own can be countered by establishing networks, finding sounding boards, and shaping your own personal leadership style. Integrity, authenticity, identity, and courage all count here.
Leading the HR function also means letting go of running it on a day-to-day basis. Formulating and instigating the HR strategy is a broader role and requires wider business skills and the ability to get the organization’s leadership onside.
The breadth of the role is big and getting bigger. It is commercial, political, strategic, personal, and varies from business to business. To succeed you must have the Board’s ear, the Executive Committee’s ear, and your ear to the ground.
The role is both internal and external. All the business’s stakeholders are also your stakeholders. You need to understand their priorities, whether they’re shareholders, customers, employees or regulating bodies. These priorities are entwined with ESG issues, and you have to own these, as well as the future of work and the impact of technology.
The expertise you have is essential. The expertise you don’t yet have is myriad. It will need to include the P&L position, what makes the business money, and how investors assess the business. Study finance for non-finance people, work hard to get up to speed, ask questions and don’t be afraid to admit you don’t have all the answers.
Identifying business trends before other members of the executive committee and bringing them into the commercial conversation, outlining the risks, opportunities, and implications of ESG issues is now a key part of the role.

The CPO role has a complete, holistic view of the business. The quest for competitive advantage runs through everything the CPO does. For future-focused chief executives, hiring the right CPO is a commercial imperative. Their work impacts all of the people in the organization, not just the HR function. It’s a business risk if the hire is wrong, and without a good fit in the role, business opportunities will be missed.

Similarly, those with ambitions to be a CPO need to find a position that aligns with their motivations, and sense of purpose, and which will set them up for success. By understanding the breadth of the CPO’s remit, and how much the role differs within different organizations, you will be better placed to find your fit—whether it’s a multinational, a group FTSE 1000 CPO role, a FTSE 250, or an agile, emerging business establishing its C-suite.

By doing your due diligence into the requirements of the job, you will find the right culture, the right goals, the right CEO, and ultimately the right CHFO role for you.

About the Author

Rachel Farley (rfarley@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ London office and a member of the European Human Resources Officers Practice.

Related Services & Industries

Human Resources Officers

Leadership Development

Performance Culture

Related Content

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

Executive Assessment

Leadership assurance: Elevating learning and development as a strategic driver of workforce planning

Learn how HR leaders can link learning and development to board priorities to strengthen succession, retain key talent, and build future-ready capabilities.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings