The composition of US unicorn 100 executive teams: A first look | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

The composition of US unicorn 100 executive teams: A first look

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Venture Capital The composition of US unicorn 100 executive teams: A first look

Our first study of key roles on the executive teams of US unicorns—start-ups valued at least $1 billion at the end of 2022—finds a different mix of racial and ethnic diversity than at Fortune 100 companies and a higher tendency to hire externally.

Heidrick & Struggles

Read the full article

Methodology

For this article, we mapped the most common roles on US unicorn executive teams: CEO; CFO; COO; CHRO; chief marketing officer; chief data, information, or technology officer; chief revenue officer; and chief legal or compliance officer. There are a total of 636 executives in these roles.

Our first study of key roles on the executive teams of US unicorns—start-ups valued at least $1 billion at the end of 2022—finds a different mix of racial and ethnic diversity than at Fortune 100 companies and a higher tendency to hire externally. As these companies continue to grow, a focus on further bolstering the diversity of their teams and building their executive development and succession planning muscles should help them stay ahead of their peers.

Background on the unicorns

Only three companies have met the criteria to be a unicorn for more than 10 years; 81% reached the threshold in the past five years.

Roles on leadership teams

At fast-growing companies, executive teams evolve quickly. Comparing the unicorn executive teams to those of Fortune 100 companies, there are marked differences in how often the team contains a few key roles:1

The differences highlight that as companies grow, even functions as crucial as those shown here can get subsumed into larger roles; for example, chief administrative officers who may have HR as part of their remit or chief customer officers who can have marketing and revenue as part of their remit.

Diversity

Gender diversity on the unicorn teams is identical to that on Fortune 100 teams; racial and ethnic diversity is higher, at 26% compared with 20%. A key reason for this is that 16% of the unicorn executives included in this study—most often CEOs and chief information, digital, or technology officers—are founders. And 35% of those 100 founders are non-white individuals, most often Asian or Asian American.

That drives the markedly high share of executives at unicorns who are Asian or Asian American compared with Fortune 100 executive teams—19%, compared with 7%.

However, new appointments to unicorn leadership teams in the first half of 2023 showed a dip in both gender and racial and ethnic diversity. On gender diversity, the share of new appointments going to women fell from 34% in 2022 to just 21% so far this year. Regarding racial and ethnic diversity, the share fell from 29% to 21% non-white individuals.

That said, in all the work we do tracking diversity among appointments to boards and executive teams,2 we typically see annual variation in these percentages, so this is not—yet—a meaningful trend.

As is the case at companies of most sizes, people holding the CHRO role at unicorns are the most diverse in terms of gender, race or ethnicity, or both: 81% of those people are diverse in some way; chief revenue officers are least often diverse, at 22%.

Ninety-four percent of unicorn leadership teams, compared with 98% of Fortune 100 leadership teams, have at least one executive adding diversity to their leadership team. Fifty-three percent of executives on unicorn leadership teams in the consumer industry are diverse, compared with one-third of those at financial services unicorns.

Where unicorns are finding expertise

Unicorns, as younger companies, have had less time to develop leadership pipelines than more established organizations. This shows in the fact that 59% of their executive teams were hired externally. For comparison, the share of external CEOs hired at the world’s largest public companies last year was 36%, and we see similar figures in other roles we track at those companies.

In addition, 42% of executives hired externally at unicorns are first timers in their role, suggesting that many unicorns are willing to offer stretch opportunities.

CFOs are most often hired externally. In roles other than CEO—where most are founders—the least frequent external hire is chief information, digital, or technology officer, at 54%. Indeed, technology leaders and COOs are the other two roles where there is a notable share of founders.

These differences reflect a common corporate growth path in that the CFO is a role for which fast-growing companies often find they need more expertise than the founder group can provide—and more quickly than in other roles.3 Unicorns are also quite open to cross-sector expertise—55% of external hires come from a different industry—underscoring the need for expertise in these key functions regardless of industry-specific expertise. Conversely, chief revenue officers most often have experience in the same industry as their company.

Three considerations for unicorn boards

Large companies are struggling to get executive development and succession planning right, other research we have conducted shows. Unicorns that start to prioritize these processes now can give themselves an edge in the competition for talent.
Nonetheless, unicorns’ willingness to cast their net widely for the expertise they need—in terms of seeking expertise from outside their industry and taking a perceived risk on first-time leaders—gives them the expertise they need to support growth now, and is something they would be wise to retain as they grow to ensure they have a better chance at finding expertise they can’t develop internally. Unicorns can also benefit from adding independent board members who can act as mentors to founder CEOs as their companies grow.
As unicorns continue to grow, many will bring on non-founder CEOs. For many, this will cause a disproportionate reduction of the racial and ethnic diversity of their leadership teams. Unicorns will be wise to focus on bolstering the diversity of the whole team, in terms of both the quantity and types of diversity. Focusing on inclusion as well as diverse representation as they grow can help them maintain that leadership, and perhaps improve on gender diversity as well.

References

1 32 unicorns also have a chief product officer role, which none of the Fortune 100 executive teams include.

2 “Board Monitor 2023: Around the globe,” Heidrick & Struggles.

3 For more, see Henry Bartlett and Lisa Gordon, “Biotech focus: Finding CFOs for booming companies,” Heidrick & Struggles.

Related Services & Industries

Inclusive Leadership

Private Equity

Venture Capital

Related Content

Venture Capital

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Amal Dokhan, managing partner for Middle East and North Africa, 500 Global

In this video interview, Amal Dokhan, managing partner at 500 Global, discusses venture capital in the Middle East and the leadership capabilities necessary for the next generation of leaders.

Venture Capital

Defining the traits of a successful venture capital leader and founder: A conversation with Lior Susan, founder and managing partner of Eclipse Ventures

Lior Susan, an investor, entrepreneur, and founder, discusses the leadership traits that are uniquely critical to succeed in the physical industries start-up landscape.

Leadership Development

Adapting your personal leadership style: Shawn Bushouse, former president of emerging brands at Nestle Health Science, discusses the differences in leadership at start-ups and larger organizations

Shawn Bushouse shares his insights on being an effective executive in both start-up and large corporate settings and how he’s adapted his own personal leadership style as he transitions between the two different types of organizations.

Venture Capital

Investing at the intersection of AI and science: An interview with Inaki Berenguer, managing partner at LifeX Ventures

Inaki Berenguer discusses how organizations can retain top tech talent, the significant impact of AI on healthcare, and how leaders should balance scientific innovation with business scalability.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings