2024 Industrial Technology Officers Organization Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2024 Industrial Technology Officers Organization Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Industrial Goods & Technology 2024 Industrial Technology Officers Organization Survey

Our first annual Industrial Technology Officers Organization Survey compiles data from a survey of senior-level executives in industrial technology companies around the world, with respondents primarily in the United States and Germany.
September 11, 2024

Tommy Snyder ,
Dr. Roman Wecker

Read the full report

Welcome to our first annual Industrial Technology Officers Organization Survey. For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled data from a survey of 57 senior-level executives in industrial technology companies around the world, with respondents primarily in the United States and Germany. We hope to expand the regional scope in future reports.

We hope you enjoy reading the report. As always, suggestions are welcome, so please feel free to contact us—or your Heidrick & Struggles representative—with questions and comments.

Introduction

The next phase of the Fourth Industrial Revolution is well underway at companies around the world: a people-driven, tech-powered transformation of business operations—and growth.

Companies at the forefront of this change are cognizant of the fact that technology alone—even artificial intelligence technology–won’t get them to a better state. They must have the right leadership in place, those who understand where operational improvements are needed, and who can implement change in a timely fashion.

To understand the journey of industrial organizations seeking to make this step change, Heidrick & Struggles recently surveyed leaders from industrial technology companies, primarily in Germany and the United States. The executives who were surveyed do not see their organizations as laggards, for the most part: nearly half say they are about as advanced in their industrial transformation as their peers.

For more, download the full report.

About the authors

Tommy Snyder (tommysnyder@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ Chicago office and regional co-lead of the Industrial Tech sector.

Roman Wecker (rwecker@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Frankfurt office and a member of the Industrial and Supply Chain & Operations Officers practices. He leads the Manufacturing and Industrial Tech sectors as well as the firm’s sustainability work in DACH.

Related Services & Industries

AI & Technology Officers

Industrial Goods & Technology

Related Content

On-Demand Talent

Three forces reshaping building products leadership—and how interim leaders are filling the gap

Conversations at this year's NAHB International Builders' Show revealed three forces stretching executive bandwidth in building products: continuous M&A, the push for operational resilience, and the modernization of commercial models. The execution challenge is no longer whether leaders see the need to act—but how they resource and sequence the response.

Financial Officers

Driving organizational transformation in family-owned businesses: A conversation with Björn Lahm, CFO of Harting Technology Group

Björn Lahm shares how he maintains culture and aligns goals with values within a family-owned business.

Financial Officers

Leadership perspectives: Insights from Alison Henwood, Chair of the Audit Committee of Umicore

In this video, Alison Henwood, Independent Non-Executive Director, Chair of the Audit Committee of Umicore, shares insights into the ideal audit chair-CFO relationship, and the leadership capabilities required for mutual success.

On-Demand Talent

Interim leadership: A lifeline for the UK industrials sector

The UK industrial sector faces transformation and skills gaps. This article looks at how interim leadership serves as a critical strategic lever for resilience, localization, and digital execution.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings