Nonprofit expertise on boards | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Nonprofit expertise on boards
Explore this page Clearly define the expertise the board needsTap a rarely sought source of expertiseConsider how best to attract those candidatesAbout the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Board Effectiveness Nonprofit expertise on boards

As societal understanding of corporate responsibility evolves at unprecedented speed, nonprofit expertise—comfort navigating the current sociopolitical climate and experience working with activists—can be valuable.

J.J. Cutler ,
Jackie Zavitz

The shift from shareholder value to stakeholder value as the measure of what a company should do accelerated markedly through 2020. Boards are among the corporate leaders that are having to juggle a more complex and often contradictory group of priorities.

Much of the drive behind these changes is an evolving societal understanding of corporate responsibility and the role organizations play in solving problems such as climate change and social injustice. Even 18 months ago, it was common practice for organizations to not get involved in current events. Now, more and more, customers and employees expect organizations to take a stand and leverage their political power; boards and CEOs are therefore required to actively choose where and how to engage, or not. Both getting involved and not getting involved can be met with varying degrees of backlash.

One thing that will help corporate boards make better and faster decisions in these situations is greater expertise in both specific issues and in managing broad stakeholder networks: directors comfortable navigating the current social landscape and political climate, with experience working with activists and fluent in ESG, broadly defined. As a result, both private and publicly held boards are, perhaps unsurprisingly, showing interest in nonprofit executives. They can take three steps to increase their chances of finding and attracting the expertise they need most: clearly define the expertise the board needs, tap a rarely sought source of expertise, and consider how best to attract those candidates.

Clearly define the expertise the board needs

We are in the early days of this evolution, and many boards are in uncharted territory. However, boards can work to clearly define what new expertise they need most. One key area of expertise many organizations are looking for is diversity and inclusion—particularly through the lens of social and racial justice. But the definitions of such skill sets are still shifting, and in order to attract the right candidates, the role and how it aligns with the overall organizational strategy should be well understood by the entire board.

Boards can begin their considerations by asking themselves questions such as the following:

Where do we see the most quickly changing stakeholder expectations?
Which issues do we expect our stakeholders to take the most interest in over the next three years?
Are there any issues that our organization plays a particular role in? (For example, energy and paper and packaging companies have important contributions to make toward sustainability.)
Are there inconsistencies within our organization between our purpose and our actions that we need to address? (For example, do our company's stated values align with its political contributions?)

Tap a rarely sought source of expertise

Executives of nonprofit companies have not typically been seen as obvious candidates for corporate boards. Indeed, previous corporate CEOs and CFOs remain the most frequent additions to boards. In the United States in 2020, for example, 51% of the new directors on Fortune 500 boards were former CEOs or CFOs.1 But in today’s context, nonprofit executives offer clearly useful and differentiated expertise.

First, they are, by definition, not focused on profit in the short term; the ways they measure their successes are far more complex than financial gains or losses. As a result, these leaders are far more comfortable than most corporate executives balancing varying and often contradictory priorities, working in the complex ecosystem all organizations now find themselves in.

In addition, nonprofit leaders typically have expertise in issues that have become more important than ever before. Depending on the areas their work has focused on, this can range from climate and environmental sustainability to racial and social justice to healthcare. Finally, nonprofit leaders have networks many corporate leaders don’t, to which they can reach out when the board may need more specific advice on how to handle a certain issue; these leaders can make introductions to leading nonprofits or activist organizations and make quick connections between organizations.

Consider how best to attract those candidates

Even with a well-defined role and a clear need for their expertise, nonprofit executives may still be undecided about joining for-profit organizations. Some may worry about the scrutiny or backlash they will face from their employees or communities they serve. Others may be concerned about being seen as window dressing, bringing their credibility to a board but not having any real influence.
It is important for organizations seeking to attract these candidates to be authentic in their intentions and be prepared to honestly and openly answer candidates’ real questions. We have seen some candidates walk away from boards because they don’t believe companies are genuinely interested in making a positive social impact. Above all, potential directors need to know they will be supported by their new fellow board members. Board chairs in particular will also have to work to integrate these experts into the board, ensuring that they are supported and listened to.

As societal understanding of corporate responsibility and the role organizations play in solving problems such as climate change and social injustice evolves at unprecedented speed, boards and CEOs are being required to actively choose where and how to engage, or not. Nonprofit expertise, those comfortable navigating the current social landscape and political climate, with experience working with activists and fluent in ESG, can be valuable. By clearly defining the expertise the board needs and considering how best to attract those candidates, boards can increase their chances of finding and attracting the talent they need most.

About the authors

J.J. Cutler (jcutler@heidrick.com) is a managing partner of the Social Impact Practice within the CEO & Board Practice and a member of the Healthcare & Life Sciences and Marketing, Sales, and Strategy Officers practices; he is based in Heidrick & Struggles’ Philadelphia office.

Jackie Zavitz (jzavitz@heidrick.com) is the partner-in-charge of the Philadelphia office and a member of the Social Impact Practice within the CEO & Board Practice.

Reference

1  Board Monitor US 2021, Heidrick & Struggles, June 8, 2021, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

Inclusive Leadership

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

CEO & Board of Directors

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden

Heidrick & Struggles’ Mohamad Turk and Jane Bargmann speak with Bob Wilt, CEO of Maaden, on leadership in a new cultural context and the capabilities needed to lead transformation in the fast-evolving Middle East market.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings