Developing future-ready leaders: How assessments are—and aren’t—used | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Developing future-ready leaders: How assessments are—and aren’t—used

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Executive Assessment Developing future-ready leaders: How assessments are—and aren’t—used

Top talent seeks organizations with clear leadership development pathways. Assessments that sit unused yield no value. Maximize ROI by linking strategy, assessment insights, leadership development, and talent decisions to drive measurable growth.

Heidrick & Struggles

View the full infographic

Companies spend significant sums on leadership development, and formal assessments of skills and capabilities can help companies understand where individual leaders need to develop and their potential. But our recent research finds inconsistent use of assessment and few links between assessments and career decisions.1

View the full infographic here

Questions leaders can ask to make better use of assessments:

What are the right times to assess executives and why?
What are the most valuable uses for executive assessments and what has to change at our company so we are using them consistently for those purposes?
What would make it easier for us to translate assessment results into action plans?
Given the high share of executives being promoted internally, and executives’ own view that assessments don’t get enough weight should assessments play more of a role in those decisions?
Should C-suite leaders have more faith in assessments’ ability to predict executive success? What would make the difference?
If they did, what would change at our company?

Reference

1 In the spring and summer of 2022, we conducted online, anonymous surveys of a total of 251 HR leaders and 150 executives in other functions in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Executive Assessment

Leadership Development

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Leadership Development

Building long-term resilience in consumer markets: A conversation with Aku Vikström, CEO of Orkla Foods Europe

Aku Vikström, CEO of a pan-Nordic branded food supplier, shares how leaders can build long-term success and resilience in consumer markets during times of macroeconomic disruption.

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Financial Officers

Crypto and digital assets focus: Finding the right leaders for a maturing sector

Crypto is a high-stakes market, and competition for capital, customers, and talent is brutal. Crypto companies should look for four crucial capabilities in their leaders.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings