Learning from women who’ve made it to the top in tech: A BCG report | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Learning from women who’ve made it to the top in tech: A BCG report
Explore this page Learning from Women Who’ve Made It to the Top in TechAbout the AuthorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Technology Learning from women who’ve made it to the top in tech: A BCG report

What propels women ahead in tech—and how can tech firms expand the ranks of female leaders? BCG and Heidrick & Struggles set out to answer those questions.

Alexis Hennessy ,
Christine Kim Morse

Read the full report

Learning from Women Who’ve Made It to the Top in Tech

The technology industry has a challenge—but also an opportunity—when it comes to gender diversity. The challenge: just as they are in many sectors, women are underrepresented in tech leadership. Women make up almost half (47%) of the US workforce, but they hold less than one-third (28%) of the leadership positions in tech. That low level of representation predates COVID-19. Add the pandemic and women shouldering a disproportionate share of the increased childcare burden, and women’s career gains could be seriously undermined down the road.

But there’s also an opportunity here: tech companies that are able expand the roster of women leaders stand to reap tangible benefits. Firms where 30% of leaders are women have a 15% increase in profitability (a net profit margin that is more than 1 percentage point higher) compared with similar firms with no female leaders, according to research from the Peterson Institute for International Economics.1

So, what propels women ahead in tech—and how can tech firms expand the ranks of female leaders? BCG and Heidrick & Struggles set out to answer those questions, surveying more than 750 female and male tech leaders and conducting in-depth interviews with more than 70 women in tech leadership positions. Among the findings:

There is no ambition gap. Roughly the same percentage of women and men—62% and 67% respectively—were trying for a promotion.
Women cite early promotions as critical—more so than men do.
Women in our survey approached the risk associated with pursuing a promotion or new job differently from men—and women are more likely to see their technical skills as critical to their advancement than men do.
Although both men and women surveyed agreed that changing employers was a powerful driver of advancement in tech, men changed jobs more frequently than women did.

Our research also identified actions that C-suite executives and hiring managers can take to support women in rising through the ranks at tech companies, as well as actions women themselves can take to improve the odds of advancement.

About the Authors

Neveen Awad (awad.neveen@bcg.com) is a managing director and partner in the Detroit office of Boston Consulting Group; she is a core member of the Technology Advantage practice.

Alexis Hennessy (ajhennessy@heidrick.com) is a partner in the Los Angeles office of Heidrick & Struggles and a member of the Global Technology & Services practice.

Christine Kim Morse (cmorse@heidrick.com) is a principal in the San Francisco office of Heidrick & Struggles and a member of the Global Technology & Services practice.

Reference

1  Marcus Noland, Tyler Moran, and Barbara Kotschwar, “Is Gender Diversity Profitable? Evidence from a Global Survey” (working paper 16-3; February 2016), Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Related Services & Industries

AI & Technology Officers

Inclusive Leadership

Technology

Technology Services

Related Content

Human Resources Officers

Chief people officer focus: Transforming HR across borders

Shirley Zhou, head of HR for ASP APAC & vice president of Fortive Asia, describes the evolution of her career and the value of taking a long-term perspective on people decisions, particularly in volatile environments.

Financial Officers

Leadership perspectives: Insights from Alison Henwood, Chair of the Audit Committee of Umicore

In this video, Alison Henwood, Independent Non-Executive Director, Chair of the Audit Committee of Umicore, shares insights into the ideal audit chair-CFO relationship, and the leadership capabilities required for mutual success.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Supply-chain officer focus: The strategic value of succession planning

Many organizations where the supply chain is crucial to operations have been elevating the strategic importance of their chief supply chain officers. But talent is scarce, and succession planning is taking on new urgency. Interviews with 30 supply chain leaders suggest three key elements of improvement.

Marketing Leaders

AI in the marketing function: A conversation with Chris Koehler, CMO at Twilio

Chris Koehler, the chief marketing officer at Twilio, discusses the ways in which his marketing function is using AI and where they are finding it adding particular value.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings