Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Executive Assessment Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.
April 21, 2026

Heidrick & Struggles

About the research

This graphic draws on data from the following surveys: Summer 2025 leadership assurance survey (n=516), Q3 2023 GTS pulse survey (n=116), Q1 2024 GTS pulse survey (n=193), Q2 2024 GTS pulse survey (n=285), Q3 2024 GTS pulse survey (n=135), April 2023 executive survey (n=254), May 2023 HR survey (n=255), summer 2025 executive survey (n=449), Q1 2025 CEO and board survey (n=1,027), summer 2025 CPO survey (n=600), August 2025 workforce planning survey (n=324), and April 2023 CEO and board succession planning survey (n=109).

This graphic highlights a clear and pressing story: leadership risk is increasing as executives express openness to new opportunities and place heightened importance on culture and growth. Yet most organizations have not translated these priorities into disciplined, forward-looking succession strategies, leading to persistent gaps in alignment, integration, and pipeline development. With growing attention from executive teams, there is a meaningful opportunity to take a more proactive, enterprise-wide approach to strengthening leadership continuity and long-term performance.

For additional insights, please see our recent articles:

Leveraging the executive leadership team to improve workforce planning
Leadership assurance: Using flexible workforce strategies to fill leadership and capability gaps
Leadership assurance: Elevating learning and development as a strategic driver of workforce planning

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Executive Assessment

Human Resources Officers

On-Demand Project Leaders, Consultants, and Experts

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Leadership Development

Building long-term resilience in consumer markets: A conversation with Aku Vikström, CEO of Orkla Foods Europe

Aku Vikström, CEO of a pan-Nordic branded food supplier, shares how leaders can build long-term success and resilience in consumer markets during times of macroeconomic disruption.

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Financial Officers

Crypto and digital assets focus: Finding the right leaders for a maturing sector

Crypto is a high-stakes market, and competition for capital, customers, and talent is brutal. Crypto companies should look for four crucial capabilities in their leaders.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings