Biotech CFO Talent: Rethinking the Search | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Biotech focus: Finding CFOs for booming companies
Explore this page Realizing the title doesn’t matterLooking across industriesMaking it personalEmbracing on-demand talentAbout the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Financial Officers Biotech focus: Finding CFOs for booming companies

For fast-growing biotech firms, CFOs with public company experience are increasingly important—and difficult to find. CEOs and boards who rethink where to find that expertise are more often finding the people they need, and finding them faster.

Henry Bartlett

In the past 18 months, the biotech sector has attracted record levels of investment bolstered by strong financial performance, advances in basic science and technology, and a spotlight on the development of COVID-19 vaccines and treatments.1 This surge in investor activity demands strong executive leadership—including CFOs who can guide companies through fast growth and the potential for sale or IPO.

At the same time, biotech firms are finding that CFOs with this type of experience can be difficult to find. Though many executives are drawn to companies with a strong sense of socially meaningful purpose, as many biotech companies have, high demand has intensified the competition for these leaders. In addition, well-established CFOs may be reluctant to join smaller companies even when they are personally aligned with a company’s purpose.

We have seen biotech CEOs and boards meet this challenge by expanding their reach in four ways: considering first-time CFO candidates, looking to adjacent industries for candidates, more effectively tapping their executive and investor ecosystems, and embracing the increasingly robust group of on-demand executives.

Realizing the title doesn’t matter

While many firms are wary of hiring a first-time CFO, the benefits can outweigh the risks. For example, a medical device company began a search to replace its existing CFO, who, leaders thought, lacked the deep biopharma expertise that the role required. They began by considering only local, public company CFOs with commercial-stage experience and an investor relations background—and found few options. After widening their search criteria to include candidates who knew the industry but had not previously held a CFO title, the company hired a finance executive who had previously led treasury and investor relations at a large and public life sciences company. Though that person had never previously served in a company-wide CFO role, they had experience as a divisional CFO for large business units.

The hire was a leap of faith; the new CFO understood this and was eager to demonstrate their value. Like any other incoming executive, they needed time to learn how to navigate the unfamiliar environment, but soon proved capable of taking on full CFO responsibilities and more, including leading earnings calls and fielding questions from analysts. In this case and many others, a strong step-up candidate with potential for growth is likely a better fit than a second-tier CFO with more experience.

Looking across industries

Though many biotech leaders begin with a strong preference for hiring a CFO with biotech expertise, such expertise is not a prerequisite for success. A publicly traded medical technology company, for example, intentionally sought out a diverse set of candidates that included executives from other life sciences sectors. The company’s leaders eventually chose to hire a CFO who had served in a variety of senior roles at a biotech company. In addition to his other qualifications, the new CFO brought a fresh perspective, an agile mindset, and renewed energy to dive into a new field.

Opening the search to related industries not only brings companies more options but also offers an opportunity to increase the diversity of the candidate pool across gender, ethnicity, and experience. Most biotech management teams are fairly homogenous and saturated with biotech expertise; a CFO from an adjacent sector can inject fresh perspective. Furthermore, in our experience, potential CFOs who are looking beyond their own industry tend to approach the role with genuine curiosity and a multi-disciplinary mindset that allows them to make connections others may not see.

Making it personal

A personal relationship can make all the difference when it comes to recruiting for any executive, and particularly, in this case, in attracting a potential CFO to a company that isn’t an obvious next step. For example, a small-cap biotech firm was able to attract a well-respected CFO with significant public company experience—and multiple offers on the table—by drawing on the fact that the firm’s CEO had once sat on the board of a company where that person had been CFO. The familiarity and trust inherent in the existing relationship was a key factor in the CFO’s decision and gave them a running start in the role.

Since most strong CFOs and potential CFOs have a host of options that look similar on paper, such previous connections with company leaders, investors, or board members can serve as a major advantage. Biotech leaders should engage their executive teams and board members early in the process of finding a CFO, not only to source candidates but to speak to potential hires, as appropriate, and personalize the company and its goals.

Embracing on-demand talent

In a talent market that’s as competitive as the one for finance leadership, executives must tap into all talent pools available. For example, a biotech start-up with an upcoming IPO was actively searching for its first-ever CFO. With no time to waste, they turned to the on-demand market to bring in a seasoned independent executive to build the new corporate infrastructure in an interim role. The executive, a former CFO and former Big Four consultant, set up the public company filing processes and designed a finance organization for the business model transition. A few months later, he seamlessly transitioned operations to the new, permanent CFO, winding down his hours as the new hire ramped up.

By deploying seasoned finance leaders on demand, biotech leaders enable themselves to get work done immediately, without compromising on the most critical competencies and characteristics of the permanent leader. In fact, executives often find that the person they bring in for the immediate stand-up or clean-up role requires a very distinct skill set from the eventual full-time hire—a difference that can help widen the aperture of their full-time search and ultimately help them land a successful candidate.2

Biotech firms in search of a CFO will need to broaden their search beyond traditional criteria and expectations. Often-overlooked candidate pools—such as first-time CFOs, people from other industries, people drawn to a company by personal connections, and on-demand leaders—can be a rich source of untapped potential. By expanding their range, biotech leaders are more likely to attract the CFOs they need to thrive in the years ahead.

About the authors

Henry Bartlett (hbartlett@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ Philadelphia office and a member of the Financial Officers Practice.

Lisa Gordon (lgordon@heidrick.com) is a principal in the New York office and a member of the Financial Officers Practice.

Acknowledgment

The authors wish to thank Kelsey O’Neal, senior director, Innovation & Enablement, of Business Talent Group, a Heidrick & Struggles company, for her contributions to this article.

References

1  Laura Cancherini, Joseph Lydon, Jorge Santos da Silva, and Alexandra Zemp, “What’s ahead for biotech: Another wave or low tide?” McKinsey & Co, April 30, 2021, mckinsey.com.

2  For more on finding on-demand CFOs, see Interim CFOs: Ensure stability and capture opportunities during a transition.

Related Services & Industries

Biopharmaceuticals

Financial Officers

Healthcare & Life Sciences

Life Sciences Tools & Services

Medical Technology

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Financial Officers

Crypto and digital assets focus: Finding the right leaders for a maturing sector

Crypto is a high-stakes market, and competition for capital, customers, and talent is brutal. Crypto companies should look for four crucial capabilities in their leaders.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Financial Officers

Driving organizational transformation in family-owned businesses: A conversation with Björn Lahm, CFO of Harting Technology Group

Björn Lahm shares how he maintains culture and aligns goals with values within a family-owned business.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings