Disruption in healthcare and life sciences: A view from the Nordics | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Disruption in healthcare and life sciences: A view from the Nordics

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Healthcare & Life Sciences Disruption in healthcare and life sciences: A view from the Nordics

As technology continues to disrupt the healthcare and life sciences industry, executives in the Nordic countries aren’t quite as concerned as their global counterparts are. To stay ahead, they expect to invest in technology and internal efficiencies.

Martin Holm

Healthcare and life sciences executives in the Nordics indicate that their companies are, compared to their global counterparts, somewhat insulated from the winds of change. Indeed, just 65% of Nordics leaders say their company is facing more pressure than it did 18 months ago, compared with three-quarters of industry executives globally.

However, more Nordics leaders expect disruption to intensify in the next 18 months, and they less often than their global peers feel prepared to handle impending disruption. Nordics executives say that organizational strengths—including the caliber of their people, their ability to manage complexity, their understanding of customer needs, and their ability to change regional strategic direction quickly—will help.

Key findings

Sixty-five percent of surveyed Nordics leaders believe their company faces more disruptive pressure than it did 18 months ago, and 73% expect that pace to intensify in the next 18 months, compared with 82% of global leaders.

Nordics leaders see the top sources of disruption as being stronger cost containment, data analytics capabilities as a source of competitive advantage, and new technology. These views largely parallel those of global executives, which center on the growing importance of leveraging data, new entrants into the market, and increasing costs in the healthcare space.

Just 47% of Nordics leaders believe they are well prepared for this disruption.

Those who do feel ready to face disruption most often cite the caliber of their people and their ability to manage complexity, as well as their understanding of customer needs and ability to change regional strategic direction quickly. This is in contrast to global leaders who, after the caliber of their people, most often said they are prepared because of their innovative use of technology.

A smaller share of Nordics leaders, compared with global leaders, agree or strongly agree that their companies are a source of disruption (40% versus 53%, respectively), representing one of the largest disparities in our survey results. This may be in part because several Nordic healthcare and life sciences companies focus on fewer therapeutic areas compared with the largest companies, which focus on a broader range. It’s also likely related to the finding that just a quarter of Nordics leaders feel the company adapts and pivots at a faster pace than competitors, compared with 53% of global executives.

Despite the relatively few Nordics executives who say technology is preparing them to face disruption, among the 40% who consider their companies disruptors, two-thirds cite the innovative use of technology as the top contributing factor.

The vast majority of both Nordics and global leaders agree that their company’s culture contributes to their success. And indeed, a full 60% of Nordics executives say that their people always deliver what they committed to, which is more often than global executives say the same.

Despite that strength, cultural shifts are one of the top three areas Nordics leaders have focused on or expect to focus on to combat disruption; the others are organizational restructuring and reevaluating strategic goals. Global leaders also focus on reevaluating goals but more often focus on creating new functions and M&A—overall taking a more externally focused approach than Nordics executives.

Given the importance that Nordics executives at disruptors place on technology, it’s also good news that Nordics executives overall are putting a great deal of focus on digital investments to combat disruption: digital efficiencies lead the list, followed by superior management talent and leadership team and a tie between digital offerings and consumer experience/customer journey.

Despite executives around the world citing the caliber of their people as important, they all also rank leadership succession as the least of their priorities for combating disruption. That said, Nordics leaders are more often focused on a need for diversity than their global peers: 60% believe it is critical to have diverse senior leadership to maintain or build a competitive advantage, and an additional 35% believe it is important. Further, it seems that they’re defining “diversity” broadly: over half of leaders in the Nordics (53%) say their company has increased focus on hiring people from other industries to contend with disruptive forces.

*** Leaders at Nordic healthcare and life sciences companies expect to manage through disruption by building on their strengths—especially their people and knowledge of customers—and are beginning to fill in the gaps, including their relative lack of focus on technology. Their faith in their people and a focus on greater diversity and expertise from other industries bode well for these companies’ ability to manage the disruptions they see coming.

About the survey

The survey was conducted online in June 2019 and gathered responses from 86 senior executives in pharmaceuticals, biotech, medtech, and other areas of the healthcare and life sciences industry. For results from our global survey, see “Disruption today in healthcare and life sciences.”

About the author

Martin Holm (mholm@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ Copenhagen office and a member of the global Healthcare & Life Sciences, Industrial, and Private Equity practices.

Related Services & Industries

Biopharmaceuticals

Disruptive Healthcare

Healthcare & Life Sciences

Related Content

On-Demand Talent

Life sciences focus: Building a blended talent model for enterprise readiness

When a single regulatory event exposes quality and compliance risks across an entire global network, an organization must mobilize the right mix of leadership, execution, and expertise fast.

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

Healthcare & Life Sciences

MedTech focus: The rise of the strategy & corporate development function

MedTech companies are increasingly embracing the strategy or corporate development chief role. Insights from companies that have found leaders for this critical function offer a blueprint for recruiting this talent.

Organizational Effectiveness

Growth, purpose, and people: A conversation with Dave Wessinger, co-founder and CEO of PointClickCare

Dave Wessinger reflects on scaling globally, balancing purpose with performance, and leading through growth and transformation.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings