Insights from the 16th annual Stanford Economic Summit: Trust, trade, talent, and more | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Insights from the 16th annual Stanford Economic Summit: Trust, trade, talent, and more

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Financial Services Insights from the 16th annual Stanford Economic Summit: Trust, trade, talent, and more

A series of panel discussions at the annual conference focused on issues of cybersecurity and trust, the importance of having the right talent in the right places, leading complex organizations, and the increasing services trade, among other pressing topics for academic, corporate, and governmental leaders.

Heidrick & Struggles

This year’s conference of the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR) brought together academic, corporate, and governmental experts to delve into topics that Brad Warga, a Heidrick & Struggles partner in charge of the San Francisco office, described as “current and unsolved issues with no right or wrong answers.” Lee Hanson, a vice chairman in the San Francisco and New York offices, highlighted the scope of the day: “From how antitrust sentiment in Europe versus Silicon Valley is affecting the technology industry (particularly Facebook, Google, and Apple) to the likely shape and impact of Brexit on the United Kingdom to the future of the cannabis market. We also heard a very eye-opening panel from cybersecurity experts about how a $60 piece of code can wreak incredible havoc on the financial system.”

The day kicked off with a reminder that we were exactly ten years on from the S&P 500’s low point during the financial crisis, and the debates on these crucial topics were forward-looking, collegial, and robust; a running theme in the room was a search for more optimism. Hanson added: “Mary Erdoes, the CEO of J.P. Morgan Asset Management, provided some comic relief by starting off with a comment about how ironic it was that she was being interviewed by the author of How Big Banks Fail, Darrell Duffie.” Erdoes then went on to offer insights on how her firm is thinking about investing in today’s environment and how she leads a global group of 25,000 people.

David Boehmer, a partner in the San Francisco office, noted that the panels throughout the day “connected together to create a fantastic view of critical issues that leaders are addressing every day. Mary Erdoes describing her ‘typical day’ was such a great snapshot of this, and it was great hearing her speak through how, on a daily basis, leaders need to cut through these massively complex issues in order to make decisions for their clients and their respective companies.”

Liz Simpson, partner in charge of the New York office, stressed that “talent was a hot topic,” particularly in the first two sessions. Patrick Collison, CEO of Stripe, was asked by an audience member if great management or a great product were the key to Stripe’s success (he said it was management, given that Stripe types of products have been around for some time). The cybersecurity panelists talked about how protecting a company against cyberattack doesn’t come down to buying more software programs; it comes down to the people you hire and staying ahead of problems. Collison also talked about how to choose what to do in life, noting that many people focus on doing the same things—such as going to college—and that other choices, such as dropping out and pursuing a different path, as he did, may be one way to bring different ideas to the innovation mix.

Other notable topics included Collison’s views on how openness to immigration and opportunity (he is an Irish immigrant to the United States) can lead to greater innovation, and a discussion among Alan O. Sykes and Susan Lund, economists from Stanford and McKinsey, respectively, and Tamara Lundgren, the CEO of Schnitzer Steel Industries, on the shifting composition of international trade, from goods to services, and the increasing component of services trade in even the heaviest of industries.

Finally, Jerome Powell, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, discussed how the Fed communicates its thinking and its plans to go on a “listening tour” so it can communicate more effectively. The spirit of the day may be encapsulated by Powell’s inserting some light moments into his talk while offering clear and substantive insights on how the Fed is planning for the road ahead after balance-sheet normalization.

Heidrick & Struggles is proud to have sponsored and participated in such an enriching day of discussions. We look forward to incorporating the ideas from this and the many other academic and corporate events we participate in around the world into our thought leadership and the work we do with our clients every day.

Related Services & Industries

Financial Services

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Technology

Related Content

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

Financial Services

An interview with Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC)

In the fifth installment of our interview series on leadership in Japan’s growing asset management industry, Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC), discusses his transition from senior roles at multinational firms to leading a Japanese financial institution. He reflects on bridging global and local practices, shaping SGIC’s strategy and culture, and shares lessons learned as the company’s first external president.

Compensation Trends

2025 US Global Markets Compensation Survey

Our second annual US Global Markets Compensation Survey examines organization and compensation data from a survey of sales, trading, and research professionals in the United States.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings