Professional services focus: How a post-COVID-19 operating model could help create a more diverse leadership pipeline | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Professional services focus: How a post-COVID-19 operating model could help create a more diverse leadership pipeline
Explore this page A working model for the futureMaking the most of the changesAbout the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Organizational Culture Professional services focus: How a post-COVID-19 operating model could help create a more diverse leadership pipeline

Professional services firms that take advantage of changes to working models created by pandemic-fueled disruption could end up with a competitive edge in attracting and retaining top people from all backgrounds.

Gustavo Alba

Professional services firms that take advantage of the opportunity presented by changes in working norms created by the pandemic could end up with a competitive edge in attracting, developing, and retaining top people from all backgrounds. By seizing the possibilities of a new working model, embracing flexible, remote work, mentoring where possible, and making an intentional commitment to D&I a part of how they implement these new policies, firms can create a more sustainable operating model and build their leadership pipeline into one more diverse and inclusive of a broad range of employees’ needs.

Professional services organizations in the United States have made significant commitments and are increasing their efforts to attract, develop, and retain a diverse workforce and, by extension, develop a diverse leadership pipeline. Numbers reported by some leading firms show that those efforts are starting to pay off—compared with corporate America overall—but the numbers are still quite low.  According to a recent PwC report, of the firm’s US leadership teams in 2020, 30% of employees were non-white, and 30% women.1 And according to the American Bar Association’s most recent National Lawyer Population Survey, only 37% of lawyers were women in 2020, and an overwhelming 86% were white.2 Those numbers compare with an overall US corporate pipeline, reported by McKinsey & Company, with 36% of entry-level workers being people of color and 47% women; in the C-suite, those numbers shrink to 15% and 22%—and only 3% were women of color.3

Many professional services firms have seen that an operating model reliant on long hours, extensive travel, and the necessity of living near an office has been a deterrent for some job seekers and current employees. Yet most firms were unable to change that model, given pre-pandemic client expectations and a talent development process based on individual mentoring on projects at client sites. Now, with old working norms out the window, firms are in a prime position to rethink their standard ways of working for the long term.

Now, with old working norms out the window, firms are in a prime position to rethink their standard ways of working for the long term.

Those that take advantage of this opportunity could end up with a competitive edge in attracting and retaining top people from all backgrounds. And though sustainable success with D&I will take much more, firms that seize the possibilities of a new working model and make an intentional commitment to D&I a part of how they implement it can jumpstart their leadership pipeline improvements.

A working model for the future

Like the leaders who built on last year’s unanticipated digital and remote work gains, professional services leaders should carry some of what they’ve learned forward. (For more, see “Achieving digital (re)acceleration.”) Based on what they’ve found can work, firm leaders may consider making changes such as the following permanent:

Reduce requirements to work at client locations

We have seen that rigorous traveling obligations tend to dissuade many talented candidates from pursuing opportunities at professional services firms—especially opportunities higher up the ladder. Because women tend to carry greater caretaking responsibilities—whether for children or aging parents or both—such requirements can be a particularly high barrier for them.

By carefully rethinking which tasks will be done more effectively in person at client sites and what work can continue to be done remotely, firms can limit travel to, for instance, every other week, and thereby open up the talent pool. The past year has shown that projects that require a large number of interviews with client executives or employees, or projects that require bringing teams or larger groups together, can be done far faster remotely than in person. In addition, remote working allows professional services firms to connect their own experts from anywhere in the world to clients they might not otherwise have been able to serve.

By carefully rethinking which tasks will be done more effectively in person at client sites and what work can continue to be done remotely, firms can limit travel to, for instance, every other week, and thereby open up the talent pool.

Institutionalize remote mentoring and team building

Many professional services firms rely on in-person, in-the-moment mentoring to develop their people, but the pandemic changed how mentoring happens. Early on, many senior firm leaders struggled to find ways to support and develop their junior team members. Now, many have found that remote mentoring through video, for example, is part of the solution to their problem. Another important piece has been making development more intentional—something that happens not only in the midst of project work but also through scheduled mentoring sessions.

Finding the right balance for a hybrid work model will also help firms create an effective mentorship structure that can provide employees access to a broader range of mentors and other senior leaders than ever before. Indeed, we’ve seen that virtual work has, in some ways, leveled the playing field by eliminating long-standing silos and eroding close inner circles built simply out of proximity. Firms can build off of these changes to create more equal and inclusive mentorship structures. In addition, many firms have found that they can offer high-potential employees a broader range of stretch assignments and job rotations with a more flexible work model. We have seen virtual team building yield similar benefits, allowing global teams to come together more easily and more often.

Finding the right balance for a hybrid work model will also help firms create an effective mentorship structure that can provide employees access to a broader range of mentors and other senior leaders than ever before.

Taken together, such changes will allow professional services firms to create a more sustainable operating model that will give them an edge in attracting and retaining the best people. They will be able to engage not only traditional candidates but people who haven’t previously been interested in professional services. Those groups include former employees who liked the work but not the lifestyle, caregivers who can’t be away from home for long periods, and people who don’t want to live in a city where the firm has offices. For example, Accenture announced in February that it would hire 150 mothers for newly created roles in technology, strategy, and consulting, and that the new employees would be supported with flexibility, support, training, and mentorship.4

Making the most of the changes

To ensure that these new and improved ways of working last and effectively improving D&I, firm leaders should begin with the following two steps:

Make a formal commitment to retaining new ways of working

Firm leaders will need to be intentional about implementing process and working-norm changes throughout their organizations. One crucial area of change will be how they assess performance and handle promotions. For example, we expect the steps many firms have taken toward real-time, rather than annual, performance reviews will be extended, and that promotion steps may become more flexible in terms of timing. Another crucial area of change will be in firms formalizing how roles have been redefined, including expectations for travel and working hours. Finally, most firms will need to take a fresh look at how they assess and maintain their talent pipeline in the context of these new ways of working.

Firm leaders will need to be intentional about implementing process and working-norm changes throughout their organizations.

Make a more intentional commitment to D&I

Many firms have already made formal D&I commitments, and some, such as PwC, are beginning to report on their progress. Those that haven’t can start by setting a quantitative goal for diversity and clearly communicating to all relevant parties how greater diversity will lead to their strategic success. All firms should consider reporting progress on their demographics. Doing so internally can demonstrate the firm’s commitment and create a sense of common purpose, and doing so externally, even when the numbers aren’t where leaders would like them to be, creates accountability and shows employees and potential new and diverse hires that the firm takes its efforts seriously, understands where there is room to grow, and is transparent about its progress.

Firms should also consider rewriting leadership performance expectations. More and more often, we hear firm leaders express concern about whether or not their senior executives are leading with an inclusive mindset, bringing people together and fostering diverse inputs. But fewer firms have such expectations as part of their formal leadership requirements. By building such characteristics into leadership job descriptions and performance goals—and potentially even linking diversity goals to leadership compensation—firms can formalize their commitment to D&I at the highest levels. Such commitment will highlight for employees at all levels, as well as other stakeholders, that the firm is determined to make progress.

More and more often, we hear firm leaders express concern about whether or not their senior executives are leading with an inclusive mindset, bringing people together and fostering diverse inputs. But fewer firms have such expectations as part of their formal leadership requirements.

About the authors

Gustavo Alba (galba@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Miami and New York offices and the global leader of the Business & Professional Services Practice.

Rebecca Glick (rglick@heidrick.com) is a principal in the Chicago office and member of Heidrick Consulting.

References

1 Building on a culture of belonging: 2020 PwC Diversity & Inclusion Transparency report, PwC, August 26, 2020, pp. 15–16.

2 ABA National Lawyer Population Survey, The American Bar Association, 2020, americanbar.org.

3 Women in the Workplace 2020, McKinsey & Co and Leanin.org, September 30, 2020, p. 8.

4 Vanessa Yurkevich, “Accenture to hire 150 moms for ‘highly coveted roles,’” CNN Business, February 18, 2021.

Related Services & Industries

Inclusive Leadership

Related Content

Social Impact

Beyond the stage: An interview with Professor Anna CY Chan, director of The Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts

In this interview, Professor Anna CY Chan, director of The Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts (HKAPA), shares how her journey as a professional dancer has shaped her dynamic and inspiring leadership style. She discusses the challenges and opportunities in performing arts education, the Academy’s commitment to creating social impact, and her passionate vision for cultivating the next generation of performing arts leaders.

Leadership Development

Leadership, breaking through, and the value of communications: An interview with Sally Susman, chief corporate affairs officer of Pfizer

Sally Susman shares her insights on what skills are most important as a leader, particularly a communications leader, as well as the value in humanity, humility, and humor.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

How AI is delivering value in an integrated supply chain: A conversation with James Borzi, EVP and chief supply chain officer at Baxter International

James Borzi shares how he sees AI continuing to optimize the healthcare supply chain; and what it means to him as a leader to lead in an AI-enabled world.

Human Resources Officers

Retail focus: How chief people officers are addressing constant transformation

Conversations with CPOs at leading US retailers highlight the current challenges in the sector’s ongoing transformation, and four areas where CPOs are mobilizing to ensure their companies have the leaders they need.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings