Digital assets focus: Four considerations when hiring leaders | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Digital assets focus: Four considerations when hiring leaders
Explore this page Related Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Financial Services Digital assets focus: Four considerations when hiring leaders

Institutions seeking to hire executives in digital assets will find it challenging due to the small talent pool made up of those who seek different incentives than more traditional potential hires.

John Hindley ,
David Richardson

Going the other way

It is natural for many individuals to approach the prospects of working for a start-up with a mix of curiosity and apprehension if they are moving away from their comfort zones. As digital assets become mainstream, that hesitancy is likely to shift into a fear of missing out, and the talent market will crowd with what one industry veteran has termed “non-legitimate actors”—those working in cryptocurrency because they think it’s the next big thing. However, genuine talent is easily identifiable:  it is set apart by the high degree of risk appetite and time invested in digital assets education.

Some firms in the digital assets space are rocketing through this growth phase at the time of writing; others will do so over the next 6 to 24 months as the rate of adoption of digital assets accelerates. Creating and maintaining the right organizational culture amid such turbulence is of utmost importance. But big firm culture does not always translate well into the digital space, often failing to incentivize talent to be assertive and entrepreneurial. Conversely, executives moving into start-ups can be deterred by a significant reduction in cash compensation, valuing equity in a more conservative manner. Coinbase’s direct listing may change that, as it promises to yield high rewards.

While the technologies behind blockchain and cryptocurrencies have been in development for more than a decade, they are only now seeing mainstream institutional adoption. MassMutual’s $100 million investment in Bitcoin in late 2020 was a watershed moment that triggered the interest of other institutional investors. Another sign of this growing adoption is that 18 central banks around the world are developing their own cryptocurrencies to maintain control over their foreign exchange policies.1

However, institutions seeking to hire executives with the right expertise in digital assets will find it challenging. That’s not only because the talent pool is relatively small and increasingly sought after, but also because the best experts will need to be convinced to shift to a significantly different organizational culture. There are four key considerations that can help traditional financial institutions find the right digital asset executives.

Seek out true believers

Nobel laureate Paul Krugman wrote in 2018 that Bitcoin was “a bubble wrapped in techno-mysticism inside a cocoon of libertarian ideology.”2 It takes a degree of courage to nay-say a Nobel prize laureate, but that is what executives in digital assets ultimately must do. They won’t add enough value to a firm if they are only attracted to the work because they think it’s the next big thing. One of the greatest challenges we have seen in hiring is finding high-caliber expertise combined with a real belief in digital assets from those who have educated themselves and see the potential for transformative change digital assets can bring.

Be prepared to make tradeoffs between domain expertise and institutional knowledge

Many of the pioneers in digital assets were individuals, not institutions. They operated on the fringes of the traditional financial services sector. On one hand, their early start in digital assets allowed these individuals to build an invaluable skill set and a deep understanding of blockchain and cryptocurrency, as well as grasp the dynamics between financial services, consumers, and fintechs. On the other hand, because many cryptocurrency pioneers chose not to work for large, well-known organizations, they have not benefitted from the credibility and safety afforded by household brands, credibility which many employers still consider a resume premium today.

Companies looking for talent with deep domain expertise often will have two distinct choices. The first option is to hire experts who have less institutional experience (and aren’t necessarily interested in it), are less motivated by status or financial incentives, and might find it challenging to operate in a larger, often more process-driven organization. The second option is to support some internal high-potential executives to step up and fill the skill set gaps, which could present different challenges as domain expertise requires an advanced command of math and technology that is less frequent outside the technology sector.

Address cultural discrepancies head-on

Similarly, the vast differences between the cultures of start-ups and large organizations can pose a challenge for large institutions. Individuals working in start-ups are accustomed to a fail-fast culture with quick decision-making processes. Bringing a crypto pioneer into a large organization that will require him or her to jump through hoops he or she might see as unnecessary could limit the extent to which he or she could succeed. (See sidebar, “Going the other way.”)

Be transparent about compensation

Compensation is a strong barometer of a firm’s culture and its employees’ tolerance for risk. In the digital assets area, compensation can be anywhere on a spectrum ranging between low base salaries combined with high levels of equity to competitive base pay with relatively high levels of equity. Start-up talent has a higher level of risk tolerance with an expectation of a potential high reward if the company becomes successful, gets bought, or goes through an IPO. It is essential that employers discuss compensation packages in detail to understand any potential reservations and manage expectations accordingly.

*** As the digital assets space has accelerated, even a year of institutional experience makes an executive exponentially more employable. Considering the limited talent pool and the investments organizations need to make to support onboarding and cultural learning, employers have to make sure they not only hire the right digital asset experts but also that they can provide an environment in which these experts can thrive and be retained.

About the authors

John Hindley (jhindley@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles' New York office and a member of the Financial Services Practice.

David Richardson (drichardson@heidrick.com) is a partner in the New York office and a member of the Financial Services Practice.

References

1 Carlo R.W. De Meijer, "Central bank digital currencies: Towards a global approach," Finextra, February 12, 2020.

2 Paul Krugman, "Bubble, bubble, fraud and trouble," New York Times, January 29, 2018.

Related Services & Industries

AI & Technology Officers

Financial Services

Leadership Development

Payments & Market Infrastructure

Technology

Wealth & Asset Management

Related Content

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

Financial Services

An interview with Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC)

In the fifth installment of our interview series on leadership in Japan’s growing asset management industry, Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC), discusses his transition from senior roles at multinational firms to leading a Japanese financial institution. He reflects on bridging global and local practices, shaping SGIC’s strategy and culture, and shares lessons learned as the company’s first external president.

Compensation Trends

2025 US Global Markets Compensation Survey

Our second annual US Global Markets Compensation Survey examines organization and compensation data from a survey of sales, trading, and research professionals in the United States.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings