The changing leadership styles of supply chain executives | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

The changing leadership styles of supply chain executives
Explore this page About the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Supply Chain & Operations Officers The changing leadership styles of supply chain executives

Over the past five years, we have tracked a marked change in the leadership styles most often used by supply chain executives.

Scott Adams

The shock of COVID-19 hit supply chain executives as hard as any, as industries from consumer goods to agriculture scrambled to provide for unforeseen needs and work in life sciences took on unprecedented urgency. The shock appears to have accelerated some shifts in how supply chain executives lead that were already underway.

Between 2016 and 2020, nearly 4,000 supply chain executives took a proprietary Heidrick & Struggles survey—the combined results of which highlight how much each leader tends toward each of the eight styles of leadership (To learn more about Heidrick & Struggles’ Leadership Signature survey, see “What's your leadership signature?”)

In 2016, the scores across styles varied little, meaning that supply chain leaders overall used a broad range of styles. Through the years, the share of executives who were more often working as collaborators, energizers, and harmonizers grew fairly steadily, while those tending toward being composers, forecasters, and pilots fell. The core executional focus, which sits with the producer style, changed little.

This focusing of leadership skills aligns with the growing strategic importance of the supply chain function in most companies. Before COVID-19, the most significant disruption most supply chain leaders were facing was from e-commerce; the resulting shifts in business models made it necessary for supply chain executives to work with leaders far outside their traditional purview, including chief marketing and chief digital officers. This brought supply chain officers out of the back room and, for many, created a full C-suite role. Such roles require far higher degrees of collaboration and connection than more siloed roles.

Looking ahead, we expect the need for supply chain leaders who can transform both their supply chains and their functions to further increase. This increasing need will be driven by omnichannel consumer requirements and e-commerce-driven supply, along with the entry of new competitors into virtually every sector—making it harder for companies to accurately build supply and demand forecasts (especially in long lead time manufacturing environments).

Furthermore, staying ahead in direct-to-consumer businesses will mean staying ahead of constantly changing technology, automation, and engineering tools, as well as adeptly using data and analytics to drive decisions—all of which will require significant digital dexterity among supply chain leaders. (For more on digital dexterity, see “Achieving digital (re)acceleration.”) Leaders will also need to maintain agility, which, especially for larger businesses with complex and global networks, can be very challenging. (For more on agility, see “The future is now: How leaders can seize this moment to build thriving organizations.”) We expect that some companies will benefit from drawing new supply chain leaders from different industries to bring a new perspective.

About the author

Scott Adams (sadams@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ Atlanta office and a member of the Supply Chain & Operations Officers and Consumer Markets practices.

Related Services & Industries

Industrial

Leadership Development

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Transportation, Logistics & Distribution

Related Content

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain, 3M

Heidrick & Struggles’ Alasdair Spink speaks with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain at 3M, on the key skills and leadership capabilities chief supply chain officers need to become future-ready.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Supply-chain officer focus: The strategic value of succession planning

Many organizations where the supply chain is crucial to operations have been elevating the strategic importance of their chief supply chain officers. But talent is scarce, and succession planning is taking on new urgency. Interviews with 30 supply chain leaders suggest three key elements of improvement.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Managing the semiconductor trilemma: A conversation with Dr. Roawen Chen, chief supply chain and operations officer at Qualcomm

Dr. Roawen Chen shares the leadership capabilities critical to managing the three competing KPIs of the semiconductor industry: pursuing the most advanced technology, having the lowest cost, and having unlimited supply.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

How AI is delivering value in an integrated supply chain: A conversation with James Borzi, EVP and chief supply chain officer at Baxter International

James Borzi shares how he sees AI continuing to optimize the healthcare supply chain; and what it means to him as a leader to lead in an AI-enabled world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings