The hard business benefits of inspiring leaders | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

The hard business benefits of inspiring leaders
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Leadership Development The hard business benefits of inspiring leaders

When leaders inspire and influence, they are also indirectly encouraging their team members to develop ways of thinking that will help them to anticipate what is coming next and thrive in the future.

Karen Rosa West, PhD ,
Megan Herbst

Inspiring leaders can sometimes be seen only as charismatic front men for their organizations. But inspiration, and the related ability to influence colleagues, has many forms, and when done well contributes far more to lasting business success than initial engagement alone. For example, as many companies have had to lay off staff in recent months, CHROs and their teams have been struggling with the considerable emotional burden of having to have so many difficult conversations. One CHRO of an oil and gas company found the wherewithal in herself to inspire and was able to unite her team around a common purpose: treating their colleagues with the dignity and respect that they deserved through the layoff process. This leader used that purpose to encourage her team to set aside their negative emotions and do what they had to do with grace. By inspiring and influencing, this leader not only created meaning and purpose but also encouraged her team to look to the future. The CHRO wanted people to be able to look back and say, “It was a difficult time and we had to make difficult decisions, but we did it right and with the respect and care that our employees deserved.”

More broadly, we know that purpose and meaning play key roles in organizations’ and leaders’ success at all times. At the organizational level, Heidrick & Struggles research has shown that people in organizations with a strong and clear purpose assess their organizations’ performance as more than twice as strong as do people at organizations without a strong purpose. (For more, see “Bringing your organization up to speed.”) At the leader level, the data shows that people who are engaged in work that has meaning and purpose report greater work satisfaction, stronger intrinsic motivation to work, and greater meaning and well-being in general.1

To understand how that works, we looked deeper into our data on leaders’ ability to inspire and influence others, drawing on assessments of more than 3,000 leaders from a variety of industries and functions worldwide. “Inspire and influence” is one element of our META framework, which identifies behaviors that differentiate high-performing organizations, teams, and leaders as they mobilize, execute, and transform with agility.

Leaders seen as better at inspiring and influencing co-create meaning and purpose with colleagues, engage and energize their organizations, and lead through influence, not just through authority. And leaders’ ability to co-create meaning and purpose is particularly strongly related to their overall leadership impact, potential to succeed in future roles, and ability to create inclusive environments for others.

Furthermore, leaders’ ability to inspire meaning and purpose in others not only affects their own effectiveness and the effectiveness of the organization but also has a notable positive effect on their team members’ effectiveness and ability to think about the future, which also builds organizational capacity.

We found that leaders whose managers scored highly on “inspire and influence” tended to be rated higher on their ability to value diverse backgrounds, experiences, and perspectives. This suggests that when team members are inspired by their leader, they are more likely to be open to and see the value in diversity of backgrounds and perspectives.

We also discovered relationships between a manager’s score on “inspire and influence” and their team members’ scores on other leadership capabilities: “shape strategy,” “lead innovation,” “put customers first,” and “adaptability.” Though these four leadership capabilities may at first seem random, upon closer inspection, the combination of these capabilities paints the picture of an inspiring manager engaging and encouraging his or her team to look to the future. In shaping strategies, leaders anticipate strategic trends and develop plans for the long and short term. In leading innovation, leaders scale and invest in new ideas and drive change to move their organizations forward. In putting the customer first, leaders anticipate customer needs and use that insight to create value for the customer. In being adaptable, leaders flex and transform their approaches to meet the needs of their situation and best prepare themselves for the future. (For more, see “Putting the customer first—for real” and “Shaping strategy: Which leadership traits help most?”)

What does this mean for leaders, then? When leaders inspire and influence, they are creating meaning and purpose, engaging and energizing their organizations, and leading through their influence. But they are also indirectly encouraging their team members to develop future-focused thinking that will help them to anticipate what is coming next and thrive in the future—and that will help the whole organization.

About the authors

Karen Rosa West (kwest@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Chicago office and the head of psychology, product research, and design for HLabs, the research arm of Heidrick & Struggles.

Megan Herbst (mherbst@heidrick.com) is a psychological analytics coordinator for HLabs; she is based in the Chicago office.

References

1 Michael F. Steger and Bryan J. Dik, “Work as meaning: Individual and organizational benefits of engaging in meaningful work,” in Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychology and Work, New York: Oxford University Press, 2009.

Related Services & Industries

Coaching

Leadership Development

Team Acceleration

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Leadership Development

Building long-term resilience in consumer markets: A conversation with Aku Vikström, CEO of Orkla Foods Europe

Aku Vikström, CEO of a pan-Nordic branded food supplier, shares how leaders can build long-term success and resilience in consumer markets during times of macroeconomic disruption.

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings