Diversity on US chemical company boards: Three steps to accelerate progress | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Diversity on US chemical company boards: Three steps to accelerate progress
Explore this page Progress so farThe way forwardAbout the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Inclusive Leadership Diversity on US chemical company boards: Three steps to accelerate progress

Some US chemical company boards have made progress on diversity by adding directors with nontraditional backgrounds. But more progress is needed. To improve, boards should focus on process, performance, and culture.

Jane Bargmann

Chemical companies, like all others, are facing increasing calls for diversity on their boards. Among the 254 current directors of Fortune 1000 chemical companies, only 27% are women and 14% ethnically or racially diverse. Only 8% are Black. However, these boards have made some notable strides in recent years: among the 44 new directors appointed to Fortune 1000 chemical companies in 2019 and 2020, 68% are diverse in some way, including 14% who are Black.1 This puts chemical companies slightly ahead of the overall Fortune 1000.

That said, overall, the current pace of refreshment means that many of these boards are still not meaningfully diverse. The gaps are particularly large for Black and other ethnically diverse leaders.

Progress so far

A deeper look into the backgrounds of the new directors in 2019 and 2020 suggests that some nominating and governance committees have already started to change their expectations for new directors’ previous experience and consider new profiles. They are creating slates filled with executives from nontraditional backgrounds and with fresh perspectives that reflect changes in strategic needs and the broader business landscape.

For example, incoming white male directors have more than twice as often been CEOs or CFOs than have diverse directors. Diverse new directors, meanwhile, are more often P&L leaders, functional specialists (such as commercial and information officers), or executives from industries outside of chemicals and even outside the broader industrial sector.

Openness to adding board members from consumer and branded product companies, for example, is linked to chemical companies’ increased focus on branding down the value chain to customers, who are increasingly discerning about what goes into the products they buy. Boards’ interest in backgrounds like chief information or commercial officers relates to the growing importance of digital, both as a tool to reach customers and as a source of risk. Similarly, P&L leaders have strong operational backgrounds, allowing them to advise companies during times of volatility.

Chemical company boards that seek diverse directors who bring new perspectives integral to business strategy are taking the first crucial steps toward seeing real business value from that diversity, other Heidrick & Struggles research has shown. (For more, see Meeting the Inclusion Imperative: How Leaders Can Link Diversity, Inclusion, and Accelerated Performance.) All companies should seek to follow this model in order to move the needle and make the industry’s boards more diverse.

The way forward

Our experience and research suggest three additional steps that board chairs and nominating committees can take to continue to increase diversity and ensure they get the most business benefit from it.

Reconsider the board refreshment process: Despite considered efforts, it is clear that many boards are unable to change as quickly as they now need to. They will benefit from stepping back to reassess their current size, term length, term or age limits, and cadence of refreshment. In our experience, most can make some changes in these areas, allowing them to become more diverse and effective. (For more, see “Building the foundation for better board refreshment.”)
Gather data on board performance: For boards to not only track success with D&I but also build momentum for further work, another important step is assessing whether the current areas of expertise and competencies directors bring are contributing to the business success as expected and where more diversity could make the board more effective. Such assessments should always take into account future strategy and expectations for economic and political conditions. Assessments are most effective when they are a regular part of reviews of board performance that also include factors such as alignment on priorities, transparency of board dynamics, and agility. (For more, see “A board review that accelerates competitiveness.”)
Create a truly inclusive culture: Inclusion—trusting others and feeling trusted and being able to collaborate freely—is central to a productive culture.2 New directors’ influencing skills, along with agility, adaptability, and the ability to leverage lessons from one unique scenario to the next, will help them contribute quickly. But it is equally important for the board to be welcoming of their perspectives. Other Heidrick & Struggles work shows how inclusive leaders act differently:

US chemical company boards have made a good start on improving their diversity but, like those in most industries, still have a way to go. They can accelerate their current efforts by reevaluating their refreshment process, board effectiveness, and level of inclusion to create space for diverse directors from a wide range of backgrounds.

About the authors

Jane Bargmann (jbargmann@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of the Industrial Practice for the Americas; she is based in Heidrick & Struggles’ Boston office.

Acknowledgment

The authors wish to thank Elizabeth Marics for her contributions to this article.

References

1 Heidrick & Struggles analysis.

2 Larry Senn and Jim Hart, Winning Teams, Winning Cultures, 2nd ed., Huntington Beach, CA: Senn Delaney, 2006.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

Inclusive Leadership

Industrial

Process Industries

Related Content

Leadership Development

Building long-term resilience in consumer markets: A conversation with Aku Vikström, CEO of Orkla Foods Europe

Aku Vikström, CEO of a pan-Nordic branded food supplier, shares how leaders can build long-term success and resilience in consumer markets during times of macroeconomic disruption.

Frontier Tech

Finding the human core of competitive advantage in the AI era: Avoiding the Pygmalion trap

As effective leadership becomes the most reliable source of value in the AI era, and as AI becomes ever more capable, leaders must understand why leadership itself remains a uniquely human capability.

Inclusive Leadership

Navigating fault lines: Leaders’ crucial capability for 2026

In an era of deep polarization, leaders can build trust and progress by enabling constructive engagement instead of taking sides—or staying silent.

Leadership Development

What great leaders learn from flawed leadership: A conversation with author Mita Mallick

Mita Mallick shares how experiences with poor leadership shaped her view on how great leaders can coach, not control, and lead with empathy and clarity.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings