Building the right board for a SPAC transaction: Three crucial considerations | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Building the right board for a SPAC transaction: Three crucial considerations
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Private Equity Building the right board for a SPAC transaction: Three crucial considerations

The boards of companies that are going public through SPACs typically need to reshape themselves quickly. Considering new requirements in advance will help them position themselves for successful transactions.

Jonathan Goldstein ,
Sara E. Spiering

The SPAC boom is unabated in 2021 so far. Building on 2020, when there were 248 SPAC IPOs in the United States, there were a further 91 in January 2021 alone. As companies are considering merging with SPACs to go public, their boards are facing new challenges, and they will need to move at unprecedented speed to meet them.

Private company boards typically consist of the founders and investor representatives. They do not face the scrutiny or regulatory requirements public company boards do. As a company prepares to go public, it often needs to revamp its board to ensure it meets exchange requirements and expectations from public markets. The difference for companies merging with SPACs is that they will need to shore up their governance on an expedited timeline because the operating company must be able to meet public company reporting obligations on the date of the closing and hit independence milestones across the first year as a public company.

Boards of operating companies that may merge with a SPAC will benefit from considering both their composition and their processes now, in three areas: prioritizing independent committee leaders; modeling public company best practices; and being intentional about diversity and inclusion. In all of these areas, boards should begin their rethink by looking at both regulatory requirements and the actions of best-in-class boards of their public peers.

1.  Crucial among the new expectations is that chairs of major committees (audit, compensation, and nominating and governance) will be independent. Prioritizing a strong independent audit chair is typically a good first step. This sends an important signal to the markets about the importance of the role and having that person in place can help in recruiting for other chair roles. New directors who have public company audit experience and/or IPO experience (either via a board or executive experience) will likely have a shorter learning curve. Boards will almost certainly need to reach beyond their existing networks to find qualified new directors and so they will benefit from expanding relationships as soon as possible.

2.  Beyond prioritizing independent committee leadership, boards will also benefit from instituting a number of public company best practices in terms of process including term limits or retirement age, independent director compensation that aligns with public company peers, and director and officer insurance. Having best-in-class processes may also help boards attract strong public company directors.

Boards considering a SPAC merger may also want to reconsider their size over time; given that early investors often sell off—and then no longer hold board seats—it may be that the board will need to temporarily increase in size to meet expectations for public companies but will naturally shrink to what the chair and nominating committee consider the ideal size for the long term. Conversely, boards may decide to consummate the merger with a relatively small board, focusing on the task at hand and then shortly reconvening to map out a robust board succession strategy. (For more on other benefits of reconsidering board fundamentals, see “Building the foundation for better board refreshment.” For more on board succession planning, see “Board succession 2020: Three steps toward long-term effectiveness.”)

3.  Finally, expectations for corporate diversity and inclusion have never been higher. This includes diversity in terms of gender, race and ethnicity, and LGBTQ+ status as well as diversity in terms of backgrounds, skill sets, and strategic needs. Other research by Heidrick & Struggles suggests that as any company seeks to add diversity to its board, it should prioritize adding diversity that aligns with the company’s overall corporate strategy, including considerations of the employee base and end customers. Boards will also want to consider recent exchange requirements for diversity and institutional investors’ growing focus on its importance.1 (For more, see Meeting the Inclusion Imperative: How Leaders Can Link Diversity, Inclusion, and Accelerated Performance.)

However, without inclusion, diversity is just numbers. For boards, this means that chairs, in particular, need to take responsibility for ensuring the board will have an inclusive culture that will allow its new members to coalesce and newer directors to acclimate and contribute quickly. (For more on board composition and culture, see Future-Proofing Your Board.)

As the SPAC boom rolls on, the boards of companies that are planning to go public through merging with SPACs will best position themselves for fast action by starting to think about the right composition and processes for when they go public now.

About the authors

Jonathan Goldstein (jgoldstein@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Private Equity Practice for the Americas; he is based in the New York office.

Todd Monti (tmonti@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of the Private Equity Practice; he is based in the New York office.

Sara E. Spiering (sspiering@heidrick.com) is a partner in the Chicago office and a member of the CEO & Board and Industrial practices.

References

1 For example, in December 2020, NASDAQ announced that it is seeking permission to adopt new listing rules requiring all NASDAQ companies to have, or explain why they do not have, at least two diverse directors. See Nasdaq, “Nasdaq to Advance Diversity through New Proposed Listing Requirements,” press release, December 1, 2020.

Related Services & Industries

Financial Services

Inclusive Leadership

Private Equity

Talent Planning M&A

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings