Three leadership challenges for SPACs | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Three leadership challenges for SPACs
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Private Equity Three leadership challenges for SPACs

As they develop from investment vehicle to operator, SPACs face three distinct leadership challenges. They will benefit from planning in advance for each.

Jonathan Goldstein

In the first 11 months of 2020, there were more than 200 SPAC IPOs in the United States, three times as many as in all of 2019. These transactions account for just under 50% of total US IPO proceeds in the year so far. And there are more than 200 SPACs in the United States actively seeking a target.1

In other words, there’s a sudden boom in this type of investment. For SPAC founders, that may be creating an unforeseen risk: given the short-lived nature of SPACs along with the huge increase in volume, founders may not have thought through the leadership needs they will face over the lifetime of their organizations. In our experience, focusing early on finding leaders for each stage of organizational development with the right mix of expertise, background, and shared purpose will lead to the best outcomes.

Often, SPACs are raised by a small group of people known to one another. But as they begin to focus on finding the right acquisition target, they will likely need knowledge that can be found only outside their personal networks, such as deep expertise in their industries and geographies of interest. Such knowledge is crucial to SPACs being able to evaluate the targets and for their leadership to understand how new ownership could create additional value.

The right governance structure, the right mix of functional expertise, and diversity are critical to success. Having the right board will also build confidence with shareholders after the IPO. Expanding the board with careful consideration of the overall purpose of the SPAC, the likely focus of investments, and which mix of expertise and backgrounds will allow the board to add the most value will be an important step toward success for leaders to take. (For more on how to consider a board’s effectiveness, see “A board review that accelerates effectiveness.”) In that expansion, ensuring the board is diverse and inclusive is more important than ever, both to support innovation and to meet increasing stakeholder expectations. (See Meeting the Inclusion Imperative: How Leaders Can Link Diversity, Inclusion, and Accelerated Performance.) Heidrick & Struggles’ CEO & Board Practice pledged to ensure slates were diverse, for example, and, in 2020, more than 60% of its placements were diverse.

Transitioning to new ownership is always a challenge. After a SPAC acquires a company, SPAC leaders need to consider everything from whether the senior leaders of the organization are aligned with their vision to whether those executives will be able to lead the organization as a whole through change. Often, SPAC leaders will want to make a change to the company’s leadership or add to the leadership team. One important aspect of leadership that is often overlooked in transactions is the ability to create a thriving culture. Other work by Heidrick & Struggles suggests that SPAC leaders who analyze and define a culture that will drive future growth and then select leaders who can shape and embody that culture will do best. (For more, see “Navigating top talent decisions for mergers and acquisitions.”)

SPAC founders who focus early and thoughtfully on these three leadership challenges will give their organizations the best chance of building a lasting success.

About the authors

Jonathan Goldstein (jgoldstein@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Private Equity Practice for the Americas; he is based in the New York office.

Todd Monti (tmonti@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Private Equity Practice; he is based in the New York office.

References

1 Data according to SPAC Analytics

Related Services & Industries

Executive Assessment

Financial Services

Inclusive Leadership

Private Equity

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings