Navigating paradox with agility | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Navigating paradox with agility
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

COVID-19 Rebuilding Navigating paradox with agility

During the COVID-19 crisis, leaders are having to make decisions that involve paradoxes: choosing between seemingly self-contradictory goals. Those who reframe their thinking about such decisions will make better ones.

Alex Libson

At this moment, world, local, and business leaders, plus all of us in our homes, are wrestling with the dilemma of staying home to stay healthy and going out to reinvigorate our economies. This paradox is just one of many the COVID-19 crisis has created. How do we have transparency of data so we know who is sick, and whether we have been in contact with someone potentially contagious, while maintaining individual privacy? How do we balance a globally interdependent economy with meeting local needs?

Polarities like these are not problems to be solved, but tensions to be managed. To complicate the matter, the two poles are interdependent: economic health impacts population health, and vice versa. There is no single answer, and those who seek one are deluding themselves. Such polarities are, however, manageable. To thrive in an era when so many decisions present paradoxes, we need to reframe what it means to “solve” them.

How can leaders navigate uncertainty, ambiguity, and competing pressures when there is no right or wrong? In a word: agility. Leaders must continually strike the right balance between the two poles of, for example, human and economic health. Just like physical balance on a seesaw, tightrope, or dance floor, leadership agility depends on intricate balance. We define agility as demonstrating adaptability, learning, resilience, and foresight.

Leaders wrestling with today’s paradoxes will not win by trying to resolve the unresolvable. Instead, they can stay agile by reframing what may seem like unreconcilable goals, analyzing the underlying tensions, defining success in the context of the paradox, and then closely monitoring the plans they implement while remaining flexible. This means taking the following practical steps:

In a world where there is more gray than black and white, more tension than absolutes, more movement than stillness, the ability to keep your balance becomes disproportionately and enduringly important. By taking the steps outlined in this article, leaders will be able to maintain their own and their organizations’ agility when facing a paradox.

About the authors

Steven Krupp (skrupp@heidrick.com) is a senior partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Philadelphia office and a member of Heidrick Consulting and the CEO & Board Practice.

Alex Libson (alibson@heidrick.com) is a principal in the Philadelphia office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

Related Services & Industries

Leadership Development

Related Content

Corporate Transformation

Trust, talent, and transformation: A conversation with Char Doll, CHRO at Ansell

Char Doll shares how grit, growth mindset, and a focus on aligning people strategy with business goals have guided her in building on HR’s strengths to elevate leadership, enhance employee experience, and drive lasting impact.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Managing the semiconductor trilemma: A conversation with Dr. Roawen Chen, chief supply chain and operations officer at Qualcomm

Dr. Roawen Chen shares the leadership capabilities critical to managing the three competing KPIs of the semiconductor industry: pursuing the most advanced technology, having the lowest cost, and having unlimited supply.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2024: Navigating shifting sands

Heidrick & Struggles’ long-standing global study of trends in board appointments and composition draws on the results of two recent surveys of CEOs and directors to explore six questions that are reshaping the boardroom.

Healthcare & Life Sciences

Leading a culture transformation in healthcare: A conversation with Paul Kempinski, president and CEO of Children’s Mercy Kansas City

Paul Kempinski shares his experience leading a culture transformation and his perspective on the skills he thinks are most vital for current or aspiring CEOs in healthcare to possess.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings