Sense of Purpose: A Beacon in the Search for Talent | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Sense of Purpose: A Beacon in the Search for Talent
Explore this page Preparing for an unknown futureRecruiting for potentialNurturing innovationHow to define organisational purposePurpose: The organisation’s fuelAbout the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Organizational Purpose & Ethics Sense of Purpose: A Beacon in the Search for Talent

Employers are increasingly finding it harder to fill management and executive positions. Companies with a clearly stated and authentic higher purpose have an advantage in the search for top talent.

Jiat-Hui Wu

This article first appeared in the Q1 2020 issue of the SID Directors Bulletin published by the Singapore Institute of Directors.

When business leaders around the Asia Pacific region were asked whether they have the right talent base to compete effectively in the digital economy, only a third gave a positive response. The report “Transforming Asia: The search for digital leaders ” published in June 2019 by Heidrick & Struggles showed this trend to be more pronounced among companies in Asia.

In today’s fast-changing digital environment, competition for talent is intensifying. Clearly, there is no time to waste in ensuring the company is in the best possible shape to attract and retain the right people. And, assuming bases such as salary, working conditions and other benefits are covered, a clear and authentic sense of purpose could be the deciding factor.

Preparing for an unknown future

There is no question that recruiting for the future is a challenging process.

Increasingly sophisticated digital technologies are continuing to transform every aspect of doing business, from managing costs and improving productivity to the way we communicate. Every day, digitisation is opening the door a little wider to greater competitiveness. Without the right people at every level of the organisation, it would be difficult to deal with the threat of increased competition and take advantage of opportunities.

Without a functioning crystal ball, it is impossible to anticipate every new skillset a company will need. Data scientist, app developer, cloud architect, search engine optimisation specialist—these are just some of the jobs driving growth across every sector that perhaps did not exist a decade ago.

Recruiting for potential

All boards should have a clear view of the next stage in the company’s economic cycle and the appropriate strategy needed to get there. The board and management can then identify the kinds of skills needed to achieve the company’s goals. This way, rather than focusing on potentially short-lived job descriptions, recruiters can be equipped and be on the lookout for highly skilled people with the potential to grow into emerging roles.

More than ever, attracting talent means attracting millennials who, according to the World Economic Forum, will comprise 75% of the global workforce by 2025. Indicators are that millennials’ priorities are somewhat different from those of previous generations. This includes a greater interest in companies with a sense of purpose beyond simply making money.

Once these employees find an employer that meets this criterion, they are more likely to stay loyal. In part, this is because engagement drives retention. Research by Heidrick & Struggles found that 73% of employees who say they work at a purpose-driven company feel engaged, compared with just 23% of those who do not.

Purpose also fuels resilience, which plays an important role in building the staying power of employees and proves their belief in the organisation. The same research also shows that 56% of employees who say they work at a purpose-driven organisation score high on resilience, compared to 36% of those who respond in the negative.

This shift towards prioritising purpose is mirrored by some of America’s most influential business leaders. In August 2019, the chief executive officers of 181 of most successful US companies signed an open letter headed “Statement on the Purpose of a Corporation.” They were committing to delivering value to each of their stakeholders for the future success of their companies, their communities and their country.

This is a trend no company can afford to ignore. Boards and management should be working together to establish a culture of inclusion and purpose, if they are not doing so already. Those who do it well could find that, along with a more talented and loyal workforce, they have a stronger bottom line.

Purpose can also unlock motivation in employees and increase productivity. Interestingly, clarity of purpose has the strongest impact on energising leadership which, in turn, has the most pronounced effect on performance.

Nurturing innovation

Purpose is an important dimension in shaping a company’s innovation culture, and acts as a guiding light throughout the big digital transformation processes. It is important for everyone in the organisation to align around the “why” when going through profound changes as outlined in Goliath’s Revenge, the authors Todd Hewlin and Scott Snyder note that: “All employees must feel that they are helping to deliver on (the) company’s future vision and purpose.”
How to define organisational purpose

The process of creating and integrating purpose statements can be broken down into four steps: discover, articulate, align, and measure.

The first step, discover, is, as suggested by author and organisational consultant Simon Sinek, to simply ask: “Why does this company exist?”

As straightforward as it sounds, this question is layered with elements such as customer promise, leadership intent, heritage and future impact.

Organisations need to design a process of developing a purpose statement that is both authentic and meaningful to all stakeholders. Talented people who are genuinely attracted by a higher purpose are quick to identify anything contrived or inauthentic.

The second step is to articulate the purpose statement, one that is succinct, meaningful and memorable. Compelling visual communication and wording will then help to communicate purpose to every stakeholder.

It is particularly important to ensure that employees at every level are familiar with both the purpose and the thinking behind it. This way, it can give everyone a sense of belonging as it helps to develop a culture that will appeal to future employees.

Thirdly, purpose must be integrated into every aspect of the business and aligned with leadership behaviour, including that of the board.

An authentic purpose provides a framework for decision-making at every level from acquisition to recruitment. It also shapes potential employees’ perception of the organisation.

Finally, purpose must also be measured.

Not every stakeholder will be fully aware of the power of purpose. The right metrics can be used to demonstrate how a clear and well-defined purpose is helping to create long-term value for all.

Core sets of data also enable a company to assess how well the purpose is understood and being lived, spotlighting any need for course correction.

Following are examples of purpose statements that are loud and clear:

“Make every delivery count.” –SingPost
“Best bank for a better world.” –DBS
“To make sustainable living commonplace.” –Unilever
“Defy uncertainty.” –Aviva
“To make people around the world feel like they can belong anywhere.” –Airbnb

Purpose: The organisation’s fuel

Purpose is the fuel of an organisation. It defines the company’s existence, inspires current employees, helps to attract the most talented workers and creates a culture of integrity and commitment. The power of purpose is particularly important in times of transformation, and business has never been more transformational than now.

About the authors

Dan Cullen (dcullen@heidrick.com) is partner-in-charge of Heidrick & Struggles’ Singapore office and a member of the Global Technology and Services Practice.

Jiat-Hui Wu (jhwu@heidrick.com) is a partner in the Singapore office and a member of the Financial Services Practice.

Related Content

Inclusive Leadership

Navigating fault lines: Leaders’ crucial capability for 2026

In an era of deep polarization, leaders can build trust and progress by enabling constructive engagement instead of taking sides—or staying silent.

CEO & Board of Directors

Innovating with purpose to drive innovation: A conversation with Nathalie Collin, Deputy CEO of Groupe La Poste

Nathalie Collin shares insights on visionary leadership, transformation, and empowering teams.

Leadership Development

Leading across boundaries: What we can learn from Socrates

This article is one in an ongoing series exploring how leaders can engage and inspire across the boundaries that divide us.

Leadership Development

Leading across boundaries: The conclave

This article is one in an ongoing series exploring how leaders can engage and inspire across the boundaries that divide us.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings