Route to the Top 2019: Interview with BJ’s Wholesale Club executive chairman Christopher Baldwin | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Route to the Top 2019: Interview with BJ’s Wholesale Club executive chairman Christopher Baldwin

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Route to the Top 2019: Interview with BJ’s Wholesale Club executive chairman Christopher Baldwin

Christopher Baldwin, executive chairman and former CEO of BJ’s Wholesale Club, talks about how the success of the CEO role will be increasingly dependent on the ability to manage the company's stakeholders.

Heidrick & Struggles

Christopher Baldwin

Christopher Baldwin is executive chairman and former CEO of BJ’s Wholesale Club, a membership-only warehouse club in the United States. He joined the company in 2015 as president, chief operating officer, and director; was appointed CEO in 2016; became chairman in 2018; and was named executive chairman in 2020. His previous roles include CEO of Hess Retail Corporation and executive roles at Kraft Foods and The Hershey Company. He also serves as an executive board member at Harlem Lacrosse and Leadership, a school-based nonprofit for at-risk youth.

Heidrick & Struggles: How do you see the CEO role changing against the backdrop of relentless business transformation, economic slowdown, shareholder activism, and newer demands—including diversity and inclusion, ESG, and sustainability?

Christopher Baldwin: We live in a world where more constituencies have a voice, far more than they did 30 years ago. I always say that no one ever needs to feel sorry for CEOs; we have an amazing role, and with that comes responsibility. I strongly believe the role needs to be firmly grounded in the core strategies of the company. The demands on the CEO are far greater than eight or nine years ago, and the biggest difference is having to manage multiple constituencies effectively and consistently. Remaining focused on the company’s strategic core principles enables a CEO to see around corners.

Heidrick & Struggles: How does that influence the search for the next generation of CEOs, especially when it comes to the skill sets and experiences your company is prioritizing for future chief executives?

Christopher Baldwin: As part of our talent succession planning process identifying and preparing potential successors to be CEO, we expose leaders to a variety of activities, especially with investors. Deeply understanding the strategic core is paramount. Giving them real exposure to the daily pressures of a CEO is invaluable. In terms of what we are looking for in potential candidates, the ability to show demonstrable experience in successfully managing a broad set of stakeholders through different circumstances is high up on the wish list. And, of course, we are looking for the ability to nurture an open environment and encourage a wide spectrum of perspectives.

Heidrick & Struggles: What would you say are the skill sets and experiences that lay the foundation for a successful CEO?

Christopher Baldwin: The ability to listen has become much more critical for new CEOs, but it has to be coupled with an effective filter and prioritization system, because if you are trying to please everyone, you will please no one in the end. It’s important to be able to quickly firm up your position on issues, stay the course, and ignore the noise in order to accelerate your business. And given that we now operate in an environment of continuous disruption from a wider set of competitors, it’s important to have the ability to be comfortable being uncomfortable in order to become a disrupter yourself. Resilience is also a fundamental characteristic—the ability to bounce back from setbacks and adjust your strategy accordingly. And as disruption breeds transformation, you have to be open to all feedback, including criticism, to effectively set and manage big transformative organizational programs.

CEOs have to also work well with their boards, and today the board composition is more diverse than in the past, not only from a gender but also from a background perspective. We have added investors’ views to the mix, which has been very helpful. But that also means that, as a CEO, your stakeholder management capabilities need to expand even further.

Heidrick & Struggles: Now turning to your own career, what would you say are the key skills and experiences that propelled you to the top role?

Christopher Baldwin: When I think about what contributed to my career, I would start with the ability to listen, which is a necessary and sometimes elusive skill but absolutely critical. I think that is even more relevant when companies go through more challenging phases, as very often those phases are caused by an inability to listen. The second is empathy, which by definition is the capacity to see the world through the eyes of others. And layered on the first two, I would add the competency to manage various stakeholders consistently.

Heidrick & Struggles: What was the most helpful tip from a mentor on how to be a successful CEO?

Christopher Baldwin: The best piece of advice that was given to me by a mentor was to build a terrific team. When you become a CEO, you realize pretty quickly that you are not capable of doing it all on your own. One thing that has contributed to my effectiveness as a CEO has been the ability to recruit tremendous leaders. It has been instrumental in enabling us to punch above our weight because we have a fantastic team!

To gain more insights on today’s CEO, see the full Route to the Top 2019 report.

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings