Excellence is the next five minutes | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Excellence is the next five minutes
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Organizational Culture Excellence is the next five minutes

What excellent leadership is—and is not—in the COVID-19 pandemic.

Rose Gailey

Excellence matters now more than ever. As the writer Hugh MacLeod said recently, “Creating excellence is not a job. Creating excellence is a moral act.” In different ways, the work we’ve both done over decades highlights the importance of putting people first to create organizations that excel. The basic idea of creating a humane culture, taking care of your people and preparing them for tomorrow, getting everyone to play the innovation game full-time, and offering products marked by unabashed excellence was and still is the bedrock.

The way to do so is by what Tom has long called “managing by wandering around,” building a human community among employees and leaders. Soft has always been hard, but now, when putting people first is even more important, how does it work when wandering around isn’t possible? How do you “wander” when interactions between leaders and teams are virtual, scheduled, or video-driven? Is it possible to truly build and maintain human community within the limitations of social distancing and shuttered offices?

Yes. Managing by wandering around is a state of mind more than a physical act. It takes leaders who fully engage each team member and let their humanity and give-a-damn-ism show, leaders who worry more about how individuals and their families are coping than making it through every agenda item. In the current crisis, we have seen the humanity of leaders make values and cultures real, moving them from what is stated to what is lived daily. And we have learned that letting humanity show through is the single thing leaders are doing that has the greatest impact on the health and well-being of individuals, teams, and organizations. Leaders and teams have been at their best as they’ve found the right balance in priorities between home and work, between well-being and a drive for performance. And all this has reinforced, spectacularly, that these are not mutually exclusive priorities, that a focus on humanity will surely drive a focus on results.

Excellence is conventionally—in fact, almost without fail—seen as a long-term aspiration. We disagree. Vehemently disagree. Excellence is not a destination at which you arrive on a glorious sunny day after years of brutally hard work. Excellence is a way of life, a way of being that sustains us and inspires us and inspires those who are around us day in and day out.

Around the globe, we celebrate daily the heroism of first responders, healthcare workers, and employees at the front line whose commitment to purpose and drive to serve every day are at the very heart of excellence. Now, with reentry and reopening of businesses occurring with some pace, we are also seeing the daily commitment of every employee who has recently been visible only through the glare of the screen, as they step up to serve customers and support team members, with the same focus on excellence.

In the end, excellence is the next five minutes—or nothing at all.

About the authors

Rose Gailey (rgailey@heidrick.com) is the leader of Heidrick Consulting’s Center of Excellence in Organization Acceleration and Culture Shaping; she is based in Heidrick & Struggles’ Costa Mesa office.

Tom Peters is coauthor of the groundbreaking management book In Search of Excellence. His most recent effort is The Excellence Dividend: Meeting the Tech Tide with Work That Wows and Jobs That Last (Vintage Books, 2018). Tom’s bedrock belief is “Execution is strategy—it’s all about the people and the doing, not the talking and the theory.” In November 2017, Tom received the Thinkers50 Lifetime Achievement Award. He can be reached at tompeters.com.

Related Services & Industries

Coaching

Performance Culture

Team Acceleration

Related Content

Social Impact

Beyond the stage: An interview with Professor Anna CY Chan, director of The Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts

In this interview, Professor Anna CY Chan, director of The Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts (HKAPA), shares how her journey as a professional dancer has shaped her dynamic and inspiring leadership style. She discusses the challenges and opportunities in performing arts education, the Academy’s commitment to creating social impact, and her passionate vision for cultivating the next generation of performing arts leaders.

Leadership Development

Leadership, breaking through, and the value of communications: An interview with Sally Susman, chief corporate affairs officer of Pfizer

Sally Susman shares her insights on what skills are most important as a leader, particularly a communications leader, as well as the value in humanity, humility, and humor.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

How AI is delivering value in an integrated supply chain: A conversation with James Borzi, EVP and chief supply chain officer at Baxter International

James Borzi shares how he sees AI continuing to optimize the healthcare supply chain; and what it means to him as a leader to lead in an AI-enabled world.

Human Resources Officers

Retail focus: How chief people officers are addressing constant transformation

Conversations with CPOs at leading US retailers highlight the current challenges in the sector’s ongoing transformation, and four areas where CPOs are mobilizing to ensure their companies have the leaders they need.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings