Governing under high uncertainty: Opportunities for emerging-market boards | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Governing under high uncertainty: Opportunities for emerging-market boards

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Board of Directors Governing under high uncertainty: Opportunities for emerging-market boards

This report, produced in partnership with BCG and INSEAD Corporate Governance Centre, explores how boards in emerging markets govern under high uncertainty while navigating complexity and risk.
January 29, 2026

Jeremy C. Hanson ,
Ron Soonieus, Burak Tansan, Annet Aris, Seckin Akar

About the report

Four years ago, BCG launched an annual collaboration with Heidrick & Struggles and INSEAD to explore how the role of the board is evolving in a rapidly changing business landscape. This year’s theme, “Governing Under High Uncertainty,” focuses on how board members individually and collectively navigate complexity in today’s dynamic environment.

For the second consecutive year, the study expands its focus to include a deeper perspective on emerging markets. The study provides a more complete view of how new challenges are shaping boardroom dynamics across regions. We conducted a series of roundtables and interviews with more than 100 senior directors from emerging markets worldwide. Through these conversations, we gained their candid perspectives on how boards are responding to some of today’s most pressing governance challenges, revealing areas of real progress as well as persistent obstacles.

Access the full report

Boards everywhere are grappling with an unpredictable world—one marked by political upheaval, shifting trade regimes, supply-chain fragility, climate shocks, technological leaps, energy insecurity, and society’s evolving expectations of companies and their leaders.

How can boards in emerging markets strengthen their governance amid high uncertainty—and do so in environments that are becoming ever more complex? How can directors, both individually and collectively, establish the clarity, composure, and collaboration needed to govern effectively when the future is unpredictable and the variables driving it are deeply intertwined?

In this report, we examine how boards are dealing with the forces now shaping board agendas: the mounting uncertainty and growing complexity that call for stronger risk oversight and resilience in order for boards to navigate today’s landscape with confidence.

Read the full report on the BCG website.

About the authors

Jeremy Hanson (jhanson@heidrick.com) is a partner in the CEO & Board Practice; he is based in the Chicago office.

Ron Soonieus is a senior advisor to Boston Consulting Group and a director in residence at the INSEAD Corporate Governance Centre, based in Amsterdam.

Burak Tansan is a managing director and senior partner at Boston Consulting Group, and chairman of the Turkey office.

Annet Aris is a senior affiliate professor of strategy & academic director at INSEAD Corporate Governance Centre.

Seckin Akar is a partner at Boston Consulting Group and a member of BCG’s Global Advantage Practice.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings