Changeboard Future Talent Conference 2019: Building a lasting high-performance culture in a digital world | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Changeboard Future Talent Conference 2019: Building a lasting high-performance culture in a digital world

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Talent Strategy Management Changeboard Future Talent Conference 2019: Building a lasting high-performance culture in a digital world

This year’s conference speakers discussed the interplay between humanity and technology, advising leaders to cultivate lifelong learning, establish a growth mind-set, and continue to develop their workforce to keep pace with emerging technology.

Heidrick & Struggles

The 2019 Changeboard Future Talent conference, held at The Royal Geographical Society in London, was a day-long exploration of the interplay between humanity and technology—and what leaders need to know to ensure their people thrive as technology develops and that relationship shifts.

This is a core component of Heidrick & Struggles’ work on digital acceleration, in which we focus on the human aspects of companies’ journeys toward becoming fully tech enabled. Scott Snyder, a partner in the Philadelphia office and co-author of Goliath’s Revenge, noted that the day reinforced his view that “humanizing the deployments of emerging technology, or augmenting and upskilling the existing workforce, will separate the leading companies that transform ways of working from those that simply deploy technology to gain efficiencies.”

One point stressed throughout the day was the importance of lifelong learning, what the speaker and psychologist Matthew Syed called “LQ,” or learning quotient . Several Heidrick & Struggles conference participants agreed with Syed that LQ, along with IQ and EQ, is a core need for executives. “Keeping a lifelong learning objective is a key measure of leaders’ digital dexterity,” noted Shaloo Kulkarni, a partner in the London office. Digital dexterity—the mix of strategic, innovative, inspirational, and executional skills leaders need to digitally accelerate their companies—is crucial at a time when less than one-third of companies believe their talent is equipped to thrive through digital transformation, according to a recent survey we conducted. (Learn more about how we see the role of leaders in digital acceleration here.)

The importance placed on leaders asking questions particularly resonated with Sharon Sands, a partner in the London office who leads Heidrick & Struggles’ center of excellence in leadership assessment and development. She distilled the message at the conference as “leaders don’t have to be tech experts, but they do need to listen enough to ask questions and be curious about changes that are occurring.”

Another strong theme of the day was workforce development. Kulkarni said the presentations made it clear that “human capital and HR professionals will absolutely need to take a front and center role in shaping the organization and talent implications of the next wave of tech revolution. As disruption becomes the norm, we will see a growing base of human capital professionals with deeper digital, technological, and commercial expertise.”

Sands noted, too, the views of Jonas Prising, chairman and CEO of ManpowerGroup, on the geographic implications of encouraging lifelong learning in the workforce: “The trend is urban. Knowledge workers are at their best when working with and close to other knowledge workers so we see more people interested in moving to cities. This trend impacts companies that are rural based, as they have to work much harder at attracting that talent. Virtual working is on the rise, but the trend is still for certain types of talent to want to be together.”

Finally, and particularly aligned with Heidrick & Struggles’ work on the influence of culture on accelerating performance, was a focus on mind-sets. Rachel Farley, an engagement manager in the London office, noted that Syed focused on the link between high performance in the digital world and having a growth mind-set: “Talent isn’t irrelevant, but disciplined practice, constant self-evaluation, and learning from mistakes build cultures that win.”

Several Heidrick & Struggles conference participants were also struck by Syed’s call for cognitive diversity and the need to embrace different approaches to problem-solving—a key priority we are also committed to as a firm. Simon Fanshawe, a writer, broadcaster, and founding member of Stonewall, highlighted the importance of buy-in from leaders to successfully foster diversity: “When businesses create teams, they need to put the difference into the team—and that means valuing difference. D&I won’t get traction without a strategic, leadership-led hook.”

Culture’s role in motivating people and encouraging collaboration is a point that Lucy Winkett, the rector of St. James’s Church in Piccadilly, explored when she spoke on the topic of “seeing is believing.” She sounded a warning note that self-limiting beliefs govern much of our interactions—and shape the future of the algorithms we increasingly work with. But she also made an inspiring point highlighted by Mike Theilmann, a partner in the Dallas office and the global managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Human Resources Officers Practice: “We can all create the mind-set to have a fundamental belief that everyone out there is conspiring to help you!”

Related Services & Industries

Human Resources Officers

Leadership Development

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

On-Demand Talent

Overcoming organizational inertia with interim leaders and experts

Stop gambling on the status quo. Learn how to quantify the price of doing nothing and audit internal capacity gaps to ignite strategic growth.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings