World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2020 | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2020
Explore this page Krishnan Rajagopalan, President & CEO, on The Responsibility of CEOs to Focus on People, Planet, and ProfitJenni Hibbert, Global Managing Partner, on Creating a More Inclusive and Sustainable WorldClaire Skinner, Regional Leader, on Adapting Organizations for SustainabilityRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Sustainability & Climate World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2020

Strategic Partner of the 2020 World Economic Forum

Sylvain Dhenin ,
Jenni Hibbert ,
Will Moynahan ,
Jeffrey S. Sanders ,
Claire Skinner ,

World Economic Forum 2020
Heidrick & Struggles is proud to participate for the 13th year as a strategic partner of the World Economic Forum. We closely identify with the Forum's mission of improving the state of the world and contribute by sharing unparalleled insight into the leadership challenges facing global organizations.

On Thursday, 23 January 2020, Krishnan Rajagopalan, President and Chief Executive Officer, participated in a panel at the World Economic Forum titled “The Inclusive Business Model.” The panel explored concrete examples of leadership strategies that foster both diversity and inclusion, and effective approaches for how to measure results.

Fellow panelists included:

Facilitator: Brian Gallagher, President and Chief Executive Officer, United Way Worldwide, USA
Sigve Brekke, President and Chief Executive Officer, Telenor Group, Norway
Christy Hoffman, General Secretary, UNI Global Union, Switzerland
Peter Hummelgaard, Minister for Employment of Denmark
Badr Jafar, Chief Executive Officer, Crescent Enterprises, United Arab Emirates; Young Global Leader
Leena Nair, Chief Human Resources Officer, Unilever, United Kingdom
Gabriela I. Ramos Patiño, Chief of Staff and Sherpa to the G20, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris

The panel underscored Heidrick & Struggles’ commitment to and leadership in the diversity and inclusion space and how we are actively working with our clients to help them recruit, build and develop diverse and inclusive leaders and organizations.

Krishnan Rajagopalan, President & CEO, on The Responsibility of CEOs to Focus on People, Planet, and Profit

At the 2020 World Economic Forum, CEOs discussed a greater purpose and responsibility for not only focusing on our planet and driving profit, but for also focusing on people and creating corporate cultures that are intentional in embracing diversity and fostering a sense of inclusion and belonging. Krishnan Rajagopalan, President & CEO, shares his thoughts below.

Jenni Hibbert, Global Managing Partner, on Creating a More Inclusive and Sustainable World

With today’s corporate boards making diversity a priority, boards have seen an increase of female and ethnic minority appointees. Jenni Hibbert, Global Managing Partner, Financial Services Practice, shares her thoughts from the 2020 World Economic Forum as organizations must examine their diversity strategies and talent pipeline in order to fully address the challenges of tomorrow.

Claire Skinner, Regional Leader, on Adapting Organizations for Sustainability

As the climate crisis dominated the agenda of the 2020 World Economic Forum, Claire Skinner, Regional Leader for Europe & Africa describes how corporate boards must adapt to make their organizations more sustainable, and how investors and corporate boards alike need to lead the way to a more sustainable future.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

Inclusive Leadership

Sustainability & Climate

Related Content

Leadership Development

Energy, policy, and purpose: A conversation with Jennifer Granholm, former US Secretary of Energy

Jennifer Granholm discusses what leadership looks like in the context of the global energy transition.

AutoMobility

Driving efficiency: How Europe’s automotive CFOs are rising to new operational challenges

Europe’s automotive CFOs are evolving into enterprise leaders, driving innovation, efficiency, and sustainability amid rising operational and regulatory challenges.

Consumer Products

Embedding sustainability and systems thinking as core healthy leadership qualities: A conversation with Stendert Krommendam, chief people and sustainability officer at Ecotone

Stendert Krommendam shares the leadership qualities he believes are critical for balancing performance, purpose, and long-term success.

Sustainability & Climate

Chief sustainability officer focus: A European CSO perspective on driving the sustainability agenda

What makes the chief sustainability officer role effective and who makes an excellent candidate? We spoke to 17 chief sustainability officers from leading European companies to find out.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings