Managing up isn’t enough: Why leaders must develop their own teams | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Managing up isn’t enough: Why leaders must develop their own teams
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Leadership Development Managing up isn’t enough: Why leaders must develop their own teams

The most successful leaders find a balance among managing up, developing relationships with peers, and leading others.

Karen Rosa West, PhD ,
Megan Herbst

No matter what exactly their role is, leaders all over the world find themselves splitting their time and energy among three main types of interaction: managing and influencing upward, interacting with their peers, and leading those at the lower levels of the organization.

For leaders who are focused on advancing their careers and taking on higher positions, the first two of these areas often take precedence. However, that prioritization can create a situation in which, perhaps unintentionally, they devote less time and energy toward relationships with their direct reports or others lower in the organization.
For these leaders, the approach is often quite effective: building relationships with and learning how to manage their peers and superiors are key elements of advancement. However, once leaders reach the highest levels of their organizations, this approach starts to break down because, at the executive level, leaders must be active contributors to the development of others. For those who haven’t focused much on this, it can quickly become a critical area of development.

The story of one such leader (we’ll call him Chris) shows why. Chris had devoted his career to supporting his boss. Chris focused on making his boss happy, did what he was told, and echoed and reinforced his boss’s opinions, even when his team had evidence that the direction they were heading was wrong. Chris wreaked havoc within his team, micromanaging their actions to ensure outcomes his boss had promised were delivered and pushing and stressing his team instead of having a difficult conversation with his boss. This behavior served him well: for more than 20 years he received promotions and raises in his boss’s wake.

However, the majority of his team were confused, and even upset, that Chris, who had not earned their respect, was clearly seen as the heir apparent to his boss. People left for other organizations or mentally disengaged from their jobs because Chris never found the time to develop his own successor or his team’s talents.

When the opportunity came for Chris to take the coveted next role, there was no one ready to take his place. This revealed to others higher in the organization the unhealthy team dynamics that Chris had created because he was entirely focused on managing up. Because he was seen as unable to lead and manage others, there was overwhelming organizational momentum to keep him from taking the role, and he was not promoted further. In the end, Chris suffered by not remembering that his team held the core ingredients to his future success. All he had to do was develop their talents. In our experience, Chris is fairly typical of aspiring executives across functions and industries.

In our analysis of assessments of more than 3,000 leaders at all organizational levels, we found that such behavior was one of the most damaging derailers—what we call behaviors that hold leaders, and their organizations, back from realizing their full potential.

“Build talent and teams” is a part of our META framework, which identifies the leadership behaviors that differentiate high-performing organizations, teams, and leaders as they seek to mobilize, execute, and transform with agility. At the individual level, building talent and teams means developing talent, building and developing teams, and strengthening organizational capacity. (For more on the META framework, see “Bringing your organization up to speed.”)

People whose managers aren’t engaged in their development tend to become disengaged at best and, at worst, may even leave their jobs. But not actively contributing to the development of others also has an impact on the evaluations of the leaders themselves, as Chris found out too late. Our data show that leaders who don’t actively contribute to the development of their teams are rated lower by their stakeholders on their overall leadership impact; perceived potential to take on future roles; and ability to build an inclusive environment, make the work of others easier, and value diverse backgrounds, experiences, and perspectives.

About the authors

Karen Rosa West (kwest@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Chicago office and the head of psychology, product research, and design for HLabs, the research arm of Heidrick & Struggles.

Megan Herbst (mherbst@heidrick.com) is a psychological analytics coordinator for HLabs; she is based in the Chicago office.

Related Services & Industries

Coaching

Leadership Development

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Leadership Development

Building long-term resilience in consumer markets: A conversation with Aku Vikström, CEO of Orkla Foods Europe

Aku Vikström, CEO of a pan-Nordic branded food supplier, shares how leaders can build long-term success and resilience in consumer markets during times of macroeconomic disruption.

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings