The innovation leader your company needs today | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

The innovation leader your company needs today
Explore this page What type of innovation leaders are companies hiring now?New product innovatorsCase study: Using product innovation as a source of competitive advantageNew capability developersCase study: Improving operations at every level with design thinkingNew business creatorsCase study: Disrupting the business to unlock more valueHow to find the right innovation leader right nowAbout the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Digital Leadership The innovation leader your company needs today

Organizations want to go digital, but without the right innovation leaders in place they may struggle to unlock real value.

Going digital, the focus for many companies today, continues to rightly demand the attention of leadership teams as they evolve to meet new challenges and expectations.

And digital transformation is to a large extent enabled by innovation, from building new products and services more quickly in order to be responsive to customers, to leveraging data for more efficient operations in HR or supply chain, to developing new disruptive businesses.

Thus, innovation matters more than ever. In our experience, companies that get it right are those that first define the problem. That means being clear about their vision and goals for digital, where they are in their development, and what type of innovation will best help them reach those goals.

What type of innovation leaders are companies hiring now?

Top innovation roles come with very different objectives and titles, and from a wide range of candidate pools—business literature is full of articles offering different taxonomies to capture and classify them. Today, there is a clear change of tide in digital disruption, with more established players using their scale, resources, and lessons learned to take the lead in disrupting their industries and setting their eyes on new ones. One of the consequences of this cross-sector convergence is that when it comes to talent, competition is more intense for skill sets that used to see only specialized demand. It also means that the scope of innovation leadership roles can vary even more widely from one company to another, depending on where they are on their innovation and digital maturity journeys.

In our experience with a variety of leading companies across industries, innovation leaders today fall into one of three broad categories based on how they deliver value to their companies:

New product innovators

These leaders improve the pace and success of new product launches while exhibiting a keen understanding of customer needs. They have a strong point of view on how customer needs are shifting and what emerging technologies will best meet them. In addition, these leaders are skilled operators capable of efficiently running a large global product development function with an eye on results.

This category of innovation leaders may be considered the most traditional of the current innovation roles, though these leaders work with more urgency in today’s world of accelerating change and shorter product cycles. To be successful, new product innovators must have relevant industry experience or at least have worked in the target product ecosystem, such as consumer Internet of Things, autonomous vehicles, or voice control.

Case study: Using product innovation as a source of competitive advantage

A consumer products company was reaching the limits of its new product variations and brand extensions from its decades-old portfolio of beloved brands. In addition, product launches were typically late or delayed and the only major brand launch in years had been unsuccessful.

To salvage its portfolio, the company hired a skilled product development operator with a track record of successful brand launches and experience managing complex design processes at a global scale. Under this new leader’s guidance, the company started using best-in-class agile processes to launch more new products more quickly and with a greater degree of success than ever before.

In less than a year, the company successfully launched a new line of products that redefined a core brand, while cutting overall investment in new product development. The company also saw sales increase and delivered the first quarterly profit in years.

New capability developers

These leaders are teachers who model and evangelize new approaches, such as design thinking, by training and rotating staff through the innovation team to immerse developing leaders in new ways of thinking.

They are strong ambassadors and focus on developing internal capabilities—often entirely separate from the development of new products or services—that will better serve customers. These competencies may include automation of key processes, digitization of functions, or developing new, more responsive supply chains. Further, new capability developers typically have a history of partnering with business units to support change and working closely with peers in IT.

Case study: Improving operations at every level with design thinking

One of the largest US healthcare providers wanted to bend the curve on rising healthcare costs while also improving quality of care as measured by patients, providers, and employees. However, competing with new healthcare service providers that promise high-quality care through technologies such as artificial intelligence, automation, and augmented reality, among many others, was a challenge felt across all functions.

Rather than focus on developing individual innovative technologies, the company set off on a search for a leader who could command a cultural change within the organization.

In launching the search from the top, the company successfully avoided one common trap of innovation efforts—that is, not having executive buy-in. And the company went one step further by not only having the CEO on board but also garnering universal agreement from every member of the executive committee about the importance, and definition, of innovation.

The candidate hired to be the company’s new chief innovation officer brought experience leading design thinking training at organizations with tens of thousands of employees. The purpose of such training is to help every employee, whether checking patients into a clinic or reviewing a claim, think about how he or she can improve customer experiences or create a more efficient process, even in a heavily regulated setting. The team has taken a “learn then build” approach.

Altogether, the changes have led the company to invest in a platform that will enable real-time claims resolution and payment and in hiring more key roles, including a head of clinical innovation and a payment innovation manager.

New business creators

These leaders prefer to look outward. They are mavens and connectors who build businesses by forming partnerships, making direct investments, and incubating new businesses separate from the core enterprise. They are often entrusted with a company’s most strategic, and publicly sensitive, efforts to “disrupt themselves.” In the book Goliath’s Revenge: How Established Companies Turn the Tables on Digital Disruptors (Wiley 2019), authors Scott Snyder and Todd Hewlin note that for large companies seeking to become digital disruptors, business model innovation often drives significantly more value than product and operational innovation.

New business creators, for example, may have developed full-stack development capabilities as part of an incubator or accelerator lab that enables engineering and commercialization of new offerings. However, these leaders still maintain crucial ties to the broader business by staying closely aligned to strategy, following through on opportunities for pilot testing, and incorporating new businesses within the core where appropriate. In fact, maintaining these connections to the core is the primary source of their value to external partners.

Case study: Disrupting the business to unlock more value

Investing in new products that could potentially disrupt the existing business is one of the hardest tasks companies can undertake. Given the potential for internal backlash, these products require radically different development approaches to be successful. Often, leaders selected to spearhead these efforts operate outside of the traditional corporate structure.

One partnership of four companies seeking to access disruptive technologies through venture investing went a step further: instead of each creating their own venture capital investment arm, they created a joint $100 million fund with equal investment from all four members. This structure freed the fund managers to invest across a wider array of technologies, offering higher potential returns both financially and strategically. The fund offers the best of both worlds to its portfolio companies—a greater degree of independence than a typical, single-sponsor corporate venture capital fund and access to four potential growth partners. Other investors provided strong positive initial feedback on the structure, despite the fact that they tend to be wary of bringing inexperienced partners to the table. The structure is expected to be able to deliver strategic value to the four companies by allowing them to access some of the best deals, which are typically “off limits” to corporate venture investors.

How to find the right innovation leader right now

While companies may need a mix of these three distinct skill sets, innovation responsibilities are large and diverse enough that they usually are not met by one person. Instead, companies should select the leader type (or types) that best align with what they are trying to achieve. And while product innovators, for example, generally come from the same industry or ecosystem, companies should be open to candidates from further afield when seeking leaders to be capability developers and new business creators.

Next, leaders who can deliver the degree of transformation most companies require from innovators today are always in short supply. But companies that can tell a compelling story about the opportunities they provide—whether it’s the chance to turn around a product portfolio or build the next great business under a brand that customers know and love—are often the most successful at attracting the right innovators.

Finally, while it is a truism that enterprise-wide initiatives like innovation will not be successful without buy-in from the top, one of the most successful examples we have seen involved buy-in not only from the CEO, but from every single member of the executive team. They were further completely aligned on the goals they were trying to achieve with innovation. Good innovation leaders are necessarily highly attuned to the attitudes of their executive peers, so the fact that the company achieved this degree of dedication and clarity was a key element in allowing the company to attract the right person.

About the author

Christopher A. McCloskey (cmccloskey@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ San Francisco office and a member of the Global Technology & Services and the Supply Chain & Operations Officers practices.

Related Services & Industries

Digital Leadership

Payments & Market Infrastructure

Semiconductors

Technology

Venture Capital

Related Content

Leadership Development

AI focus: Leveraging your culture to accelerate GenAI enablement

Realizing the value of your AI investments relies more on your culture than on the technology itself. Our work and interviews with five executives highlight how companies are engaging their leaders to speed GenAI progress.

FinTech

Stablecoins and the future of finance: A conversation with Marieke Flament, co-author of Euro Stable Watch, board member and advisor

Marieke Flament explores how stablecoins are reshaping global finance and what today’s leaders need to thrive in a decentralized financial system.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

AI leadership in communications: A conversation with Corey duBrowa, Global CEO of Burson

Corey duBrowa shares practical guidance for corporate communications leaders on harnessing AI, staying ahead of emerging trends, and advising CEOs and boards on the right questions to ask.

Digital Leadership

AI and leadership: How finance, HR, and technology leaders are collaborating to make the most of AI across the enterprise

When leaders of these key functions work together effectively, their companies are more able to benefit from implementing AI. Focusing on three areas will help keep progress going.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings