Asset management: Improving connectivity and profitability by rethinking one key role | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Asset management: Improving connectivity and profitability by rethinking one key role
Explore this page Getting to the heart of effective execution in asset managementElevating the chief product officer in asset managementDefining the CPO roleRestructuring the teamAbout the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Financial Services Asset management: Improving connectivity and profitability by rethinking one key role

Rethinking the focus and structure of the chief product officer role will help asset management firms better connect with customers, innovate more effectively, and operate more nimbly.

Renee Neri

Successful asset management firms today are those that can continuously innovate in response to shifting and globalizing industry dynamics. Client preferences are ever evolving, specifically in terms of an increased preference for digital interaction and demand for more comprehensive solutions rather than standalone offerings. Additionally, firms must factor in the continual effects of new entrants and disruption, not to mention the external influences of recent global crises and economic volatility.

Most firms are approaching this reality by pursuing similar courses of action: expanding and deepening investment solutions, digitizing investment and marketing approaches, and reviewing distribution strategies. What sets firms apart is how well they can execute on those strategies. One approach that drives execution is rethinking the product function as a whole. Elevating it to the C-suite enables a transformation toward more executive influence and sends a strong signal that a firm is focused on cross-platform evolution rather than small, incremental solutions.

Getting to the heart of effective execution in asset management

Heidrick & Struggles research has shown that companies accelerate their performance when they mobilize, execute, and transform with agility. (For more on the research and how it applies to companies of all kinds, see “Bringing your organization up to speed.”)

For asset managers focusing on their product strategy, our experience and discussions with industry leaders suggest three principal areas of focus.

1.  Fostering a customer-first mindset: Developing a more customer-centric approach requires a more collaborative and innovative culture. Embedding this ethos across the organization involves putting customers into the organization’s core values and processes. (For more, see “Putting the customer first—for real.”) Leaders can understand where they currently stand on the customer-centricity spectrum by asking:

Do we truly understand client needs and how they are evolving?
In what ways and how frequently do we try to understand clients’ changing interests and buying habits?
Are we making assumptions based on past trends, or do we convene groups of clients to discuss emerging issues and interests and actively solicit feedback?

How focused are we on cross-selling and offering comprehensive solutions as client needs change?
Do we do sufficient diligence into potential clients’ situations before initial meetings so that we can both present a sophisticated understanding of their needs and highlight the unique capabilities of the firm?
How involved are our front-office employees in defining innovation goals?
How effectively are we reaching clients in new ways, particularly via digital channels?
How well do we understand where clients derive the most value from the current platform and what they value least?
For organizations selling to individuals, how well do we segment customers based not only on financial metrics but also on specific investment priorities (such as environmental, social, and governance issues) or degree of interest in products beyond asset management (such as tax or philanthropic advice)?

2.  Innovation: Organizations of all kinds struggle to innovate when a culture penalizes failure. Asset management firms tend to have more traditional cultures, which are heavily influenced by regulation. But such cultures also result from maintaining disciplined, repeatable processes over multiple market cycles. Therefore, these firms tend to be particularly averse to innovation risk and avoid revising long-standing investment principles. Asset management firms have also historically operated in deeply rooted silos with limited connection across the organization. That complexity combined with relatively low digital dexterity compared with other industries can significantly inhibit innovation. (For more on how increasing simplicity can improve organizational performance, see “Why simplicity is the key to accelerating performance.” For more on why digital dexterity matters, see “Achieving digital (re)acceleration.”) Yet succeeding with both innovation and digital transformation is crucial, particularly as digital-first firms are becoming legitimate competitors.
The good news is that asset management firms have a head start in that, contrary to some other industries, they are typically very sophisticated users of data and analytics for investing. Therefore, one way they can enhance digital disruption is to take that natural affinity for data and find ways to extend that expertise more broadly. Leaders can understand how well their firms are doing currently by asking:

How digitally dexterous are we today, and where do we most need to improve in order to drive continuous innovation?
How can we leverage our analytic and quantitative knowledge to bring a more data-driven approach to other functions in our organization? Are there tools we can launch digitally to better meet client and employee needs? Where can we pilot ideas we can learn from quickly?
From which products does the majority of our revenue come? What do clients value in those products? Are we pricing and packaging our products to get the most return on those offering the most value?
How do we need to reshape our product lineup to address fee pressures and changes in client asset allocations? Can we use other operational data to understand client interest in more comprehensive services?
How do we need to innovate our marketing to better make the case that our capabilities meet client needs?
What does our existing data tell us regarding additional unique products or investment strategies we could create based on our specific strengths and customer needs?
How can we simplify our processes, operations, and methods of client engagement to ensure those products are scalable?

3.  Simplicity in execution: Organizational agility, and subsequent outperformance, requires a leadership team to be able to translate ideas into reality faster than its competition and to hold true to its purpose at the same time. (For more on leading with agility, see “From blame to gain: Leading with agility in a crisis.”) Simplicity is as important a contributor to corporate performance as is innovation; indeed, 56% of highly accelerating organizations, and only 20% of low-accelerating organizations, think they have efficient processes. (See “Why simplicity is the key to accelerating performance.”) But achieving true organizational agility requires more. Leaders can understand how effectively their organizations are currently operating by asking:
How quickly are we able to bring new ideas to market?
How can we simplify our structure, operations, or technology systems to be able to move more efficiently?
How adaptable and resilient is our organization, including in areas as fundamental as our investment philosophy?
How well do we learn as an organization? What sources are we learning from?
How well can we foresee changes—to technology, to the competitive landscape, to the economy, as well as among our clients?

Elevating the chief product officer in asset management

The chief product officer (CPO) plays a leading role in all three of these crucial areas of execution for asset managers, and these areas span the entirety of their organizations. For example, in order to truly understand customers’ needs, CPOs must be closely connected to the distribution teams that face clients every day and have firsthand knowledge of why clients are making specific choices. CPOs must also have an intimate understanding of the investment capabilities intrinsic to the current platform when considering innovation. This will reflect their strategic lens on the marketplace and unique insights into how they can competitively represent the firm’s capabilities externally. Fundamentally, they must be able to build products that not only work but for which there is also a good story to tell. Finally, CPOs must be part of corporate strategy development, thinking about potential ways to augment existing capabilities, as well as have a keen understanding of the financial impact of pricing and product profitability.

Though there is no one-size-fits-all model for the role in the industry, it is clear that elevating the role—from typically reporting through sales or investments to reporting to the CEO or operations as a part of the C-suite—will allow the product leader maximum ability to influence execution. It is also crucial that the function not be positioned as a cost center and that the chosen leader can navigate with influence across all functions of the firm.

Influencing is particularly important because accelerating execution for asset managers requires a regular and proactive evaluation of the product suite relative to historical offerings and in consideration of the competitive landscape. At firms where long-term, deeply rooted capabilities exist, this is both particularly important and particularly difficult. It can infuse tension into long-held—and sometimes firm-defining—investment belief systems. But avoiding those challenging conversations or allowing inertia to lead the organization’s evolution will be a sure path to underperformance. A CPO whose role is designed to operate across silos and who makes good use of customer and competitor data can become an objective, credible leader of constructive discussions for the firm as a whole.

Defining the CPO role

Senior product strategy executives in asset management tend to have one of four areas of focus, as described below. Asset management CEOs will be able to assess which mix of expertise is right for their firm by answering a few questions, starting with whether they have historically invested more heavily in new products or distribution. Other questions include how robust the firm’s platforms are now, how strong the organization’s data skills are, how open to innovation other firm leaders are, how agile the firm has proven to be, and how well the firm currently assesses client interests.

For almost any firm, the right CPO will be someone who has experience with clients, is closely connected to investment strategy, and has clear views on firm-level strategic direction as well as a strong influence on go-to-market commercial positioning via internal marketing teams.

Restructuring the team

Finally, product development teams also need to be restructured to foster an organization-wide customer-first mindset, innovation, and agility of execution. Currently, teams either are structured with members specialized across product strategy, implementation (on a regional basis), and competitive analysis or are asset-class or even business-objective centric, typically lending to the delivery of explicit business-generation goals. Streamlining reporting, placing product strategy as a central touchpoint within the organization, and positioning the role as a peer within the executive leadership team will make significant progress toward driving organizational results.

As asset managers continue to optimize their organizational structure, they will need to remember that rigorous execution combined with a nimble mindset will help distinguish their organizations from the competition. To do this successfully, firm leaders must have an honest diagnosis of their current levels of progress related to customer centricity, comfort with innovation, and readiness for agile execution. Then they must clear the path for their chief product officer to evaluate and potentially augment existing firm strengths, while ensuring the CPO’s ability to influence, at a peer level, across the executive team. From there, the organization should be able to take advice, in the spirit of progress and evolution, toward being a higher-performing company with a leader who brings significant cross-functional impact.

About the author

Renee Neri (rneri@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ New York office and a member of the Financial Services Practice.

Related Services & Industries

Digital Leadership

Financial Services

Leadership Development

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Wealth & Asset Management

Related Content

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

Financial Services

An interview with Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC)

In the fifth installment of our interview series on leadership in Japan’s growing asset management industry, Ken Kobayashi, president and representative director of SMBC Global Investment & Consulting Ltd. (SGIC), discusses his transition from senior roles at multinational firms to leading a Japanese financial institution. He reflects on bridging global and local practices, shaping SGIC’s strategy and culture, and shares lessons learned as the company’s first external president.

Compensation Trends

2025 US Global Markets Compensation Survey

Our second annual US Global Markets Compensation Survey examines organization and compensation data from a survey of sales, trading, and research professionals in the United States.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings