What accelerating teams do better | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

What accelerating teams do better
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Team Effectiveness What accelerating teams do better

The way teams operate and deliver can make or break a company’s performance as well as set the tone for its culture. Leaders who keep their teams motivated, with all eyes set on a shared purpose, have a better chance of thriving in the long term.

TA Mitchell ,
Becky Friend

Teams are the critical performance unit of any organization. As companies all over the world are reorganizing or restructuring to better navigate the pandemic and the economic crisis it triggered, resetting from one of the biggest shocks since the Great Depression, teams will no doubt become leaner and feel heightened pressure to perform better than ever. That’s true across the board but particularly important for leadership teams, for whom the stakes are at their highest. Getting teams motivated and providing the support employees need to perform at their best will have a positive impact not only on their results, but also on the overall organizational culture.

However, even before the pandemic, only 13% of the teams we analyzed were qualifying as the strongest performers—what we call “accelerating”—while about a third were derailing or lagging. Our research assessed more than 2,500 teams and identified 16 factors that can help them accelerate. Accelerating teams score high on all 16 factors, but, in our experience, three factors have the biggest impact on whether teams are accelerating or faltering: setting a clear direction, making effective decisions, and implementing a distributed leadership model, which ensures full team participation.

An equally important finding is that, across all 16 factors, leaders score their team performance higher than team members do. So, when team leaders see problems, they should be aware that their team members’ views will be even worse. Part of accelerating team performance will be reconciling those different perceptions, not in the least to reassure team members. Leaders should make sure they consistently seek to understand what their teams’ views are and make sure they feel comfortable sharing those views with leaders.

Setting a clear direction

When leaders provide a clear direction and road map for their teams, their expectations of future performance rise 1.7 times compared with those of teams without a clear direction. It has the effect of a self-fulfilling prophecy. The clearer leaders are about the future they are trying to build, the way they are choosing to prioritize what they will deliver on in that future, how they will relate to other teams and business functions, and how they will measure and reward performance, the more their teams can place themselves into that vision for the future and confidently work toward it.

Setting a clear direction supports the building of a shared purpose with mutual commitment, which, in turn, allows teams to deliver on their priorities and focus on the work only they can do. A clear direction and shared purpose will help leaders avoid one of the biggest pitfalls of team acceleration: getting stuck in a trouble-shooting mode, when team members allow too many priorities to pull them in competing directions.

The starting point in defining or redefining a clear direction for any team is to make sure that the direction aligns to the organizational purpose and strategy in a way that is understood and embraced by each team member. (Other Heidrick & Struggles research links clarity of purpose with performance and highlights that activating purpose at all levels of the organization is an important element of performance. For more, see “Activating organizational purpose.”)

The leadership team of a global car manufacturer wanted to improve their team performance as part of addressing performance and culture challenges at the company. Their own view was that their strategy was unclear, that there was a lack of individual ownership, and that performance management took a back seat in their priorities, which encouraged mediocrity. The leaders started with a series of workshops to clarify their shared team purpose, find ways to align the team behaviors to the strategy, develop leadership team members as role models in the organization, and find ways to increase organizational agility in line with their values. Their model and recommendations were cascaded into their company, and teams designed their own journeys, tailoring the outputs from the leadership team to their specific challenges and against 10 key indicators of acceleration that the leadership team prioritized. The company's top 50 leaders were coached in areas like strategic leadership, acting like a role model, and positive power and influence. As a result, the company saw an improvement in organizational culture, better pace to market by reducing plant opening time from eight years to five, and increased savings.

Disciplined about decision making

Once a team has a clear direction, they can focus on day-to-day performance. To a large extent, the success of the team depends on its members’ ability to come together and make decisions in a consistent, inclusive manner, which, in turn, spurs everyone into action. The ability pays off: when teams are better at it, they are twice as likely to exceed expectations, which sets the tone of how they will perform. For example, when a new company was carved out of a conglomerate, they formed a new leadership team and it required a new mindset around the decision-making process. Leaders had to eliminate a few negative practices such as making decisions without including the whole team, delaying resolutions, or not making clear decisions. To change the mindset, the team members had to change their habits and practices as well. They designed a team charter, which defined their objectives, resources, constraints, expectations, and responsibilities. This was followed by a clear mapping out of how every person in the team would be involved in major decisions: who would lead, provide feedback, review, or approve. This exercise brought great clarity and guided the team’s most important decisions.

At the heart of getting disciplined decision making right is identifying the few critical decisions that the team needs to make and figuring out how to make those decisions using diverse and innovative thinking while translating ideas into tangible outcomes and actions.

Our data shows that though all teams tend to find it difficult to get disciplined decision making right, accelerating teams more often succeed and are better at a few key parts of decision making: sharing information seamlessly, having a streamlined process, and having clear decision rights and responsibilities.

A private equity–owned business with operations in different countries went through a series of mergers, and, while they had a strong financial performance, they found that the organization had significant cultural challenges, and, even more worrying, that their new operating model was causing tensions between teams. A multi-team assessment identified that a lack of disciplined decision making was a common derailer across all teams. Leaders ran a series of workshops with their teams to discuss the findings and prioritize the issues that needed to be addressed: customer-first thinking, energized leadership, simplicity, and agility. Each team had its own journey that was designed to help them accelerate and was supported by coaches. As a result, the organization’s core processes were significantly improved, and its employee engagement survey showed an overall sense of empowerment across all teams.

Promoting distributed leadership

Distributed leadership ensures the full participation of all team members and fosters a collaborative and proactive team mindset along with an inclusive culture that encourages people to feel free to share perspectives and concerns on behalf of the team. Such an environment is more likely to encourage team members to truly align on a shared purpose and is essential in establishing an effective, disciplined decision-making process. There is a wide spectrum of team leadership culture, from the authoritative, where one person makes decisions, to consultative, where the leader asks for advice and creates  space for debate, to challenging, where decision making is fully shared by the team. Most teams sit somewhere in the middle of this spectrum and have a consultative style, where the leader factors in the opinions and advice of his or her team members and then makes a call. Any team can shift into an authoritative mode in the case of a crisis like COVID-19 and revert to their default dynamic as the crisis recedes, as long as they know what kind of leadership they want.

“Distributed leadership” is sometimes taken to mean that nothing is done without consensus. But teams that are getting distributed leadership right operate inclusively, so that all team members feel able to bring up ideas or concerns and yet each team member takes responsibility for fulfilling his or her individual role and responsibilities. Most often, the starting point for getting distributed leadership right is individual coaching for team leaders that is focused on developing a collaborative mindset for themselves and their team, effective facilitation skills, and revamped team processes, such as meeting management.

As a global logistics company changed hands from a family business to a private equity ownership,  the leadership team decided to tackle a culture in which few people felt empowered as the result of a long-standing command-and-control organizational leadership style of its previous owners. They agreed on a new purpose and accepted behaviors of the leadership team members, built a case for collaboration, and, for balance, identified the benefits to individual team members of adopting the new behaviors. In parallel, the leaders redefined their leadership model, worked to understand each other's strengths, and undertook individual coaching on new behaviors and building capabilities in conflict management and feedback. The result was a significant improvement of the way stakeholders saw the team, retention of top leadership talent, a significant increase in their change management ability, and an overall improvement in organizational culture.

The way teams operate and deliver—particularly leadership teams—can make or break a company’s performance as well as set the tone for its culture. Leaders who keep their teams motivated, with all eyes set on a shared purpose, a road map for achieving that purpose, disciplined decision making, and a distributed leadership model will have a better chance of thriving in the long term.

About the authors

Alice Breeden (abreeden@heidrick.com) is the leader of CEO & Board and Team Acceleration for Heidrick Consulting; she is based in Heidrick & Struggles’ London office.

Becky Friend (bfriend@heidrick.com) is a client director in the London office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

TA Mitchell (tmitchell@heidrick.com) is a principal in the London office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

Related Services & Industries

Organization Acceleration

Team Acceleration

Related Content

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

Frontier Tech

Finding the human core of competitive advantage in the AI era: Avoiding the Pygmalion trap

As effective leadership becomes the most reliable source of value in the AI era, and as AI becomes ever more capable, leaders must understand why leadership itself remains a uniquely human capability.

On-Demand Talent

Leadership assurance: Using flexible workforce strategies to fill leadership and capability gaps

Only 15% of HR leaders say they include interim leaders and experts in their workforce planning. But even companies with the best planning face leadership and capability gaps; when used strategically, interim leaders can help companies succeed across them.

Industrial

How to drive agile AI adoption: A conversation with Michael Lefenfeld, president and CEO of Hexion

Michael Lefenfeld shares how organizations can build AI-enabled workforces and strengthen leadership through consistent processes.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings