Hiring social sector CEOs: Three ways boards should engage employees | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Hiring social sector CEOs: Three ways boards should engage employees
Explore this page About the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Education & Nonprofit Hiring social sector CEOs: Three ways boards should engage employees

To make a social sector CEO search successful, boards and leaders should work to align their purpose with their employees, balancing employee perspectives with the financial, legal, and governance needs of the organization.

J.J. Cutler ,
Jackie Zavitz

Finding the right leader for a social sector organization has never been more critical or complicated. As more organizations consider their impact on global and local communities and expectations for transparency, philanthropy, and social responsibility proliferate, a successful social sector CEO will need to be able to communicate purpose and demonstrate authentic commitment to their organization’s cause—as well as possess more traditional strategic organizational leadership capabilities and the strong financial acumen necessary to lead a complex and visible organization.

The right balance between transparent, inclusive, and authentic commitment and traditional governance requirements is an area where we are increasingly seeing disconnects between the expectations of boards and their frontline staff. This is happening as understandings of social justice shift, calls for greater diversity and representation continue to intensify, and a younger, generally more progressive generation—often empowered by social media to make their views known—enters the workforce. This disconnect has, in some cases, led to the failures of incoming CEOs at some high-profile organizations; because their search process did not set them up well for success, they were unable to build initial credibility and connect with their teams.

To position their next CEO for success, nonprofit boards can and should do more in the CEO search process to consider the role the staff should play and balance staff needs and perspectives with the board’s view of the leadership needs of the organization. The following are three straightforward steps boards can take to do so.

Build trust and ensure clarity on roles and responsibilities

Boards and staff must have a very candid understanding of the fact that ultimate decision-making authority is with the board. However, board members should also realize that the input of the staff on the front lines of the organization, those who regularly interact with or are from the communities it is meant to serve, will provide valuable insight into the organization’s needs, culture, strengths, and areas in need of improvement.

Board members should clearly articulate the roles and responsibilities of all parties involved in the hiring process and instill in the staff a sense of confidence and trust that the board is driven by the same mission as the employees. Heidrick & Struggles’ research on organizational acceleration shows that organizations, where employees feel they have clarity about a company’s fundamental purpose, perform better. This is because purpose energizes leaders by providing them with the opportunity to inspire employees and make everyone feel as if they’re working toward some greater good. (For more on the benefits of purpose-driven leadership, see “Activating organizational purpose,” and “The hard business benefits of inspiring leaders.”)

Purpose energizes leaders by providing them with the opportunity to inspire employees and make everyone feel as if they’re working toward some greater good.

In social sector organizations, this effect is even more pronounced because, from board members to entry-level employees, people work for these organizations primarily because of their passionate commitment to the cause, whatever it may be. The board can create a sense of organizational and cultural unity based on that shared purpose. In our experience, that sense of unity significantly increases staff members’ comfort with everyone’s roles in the hiring process.

Align expectations and engage employees early

Boards and senior leaders should engage employees early in the hiring process, before any potential candidates are even contacted. Board members should clearly communicate what kind of person they seek and solicit employees’ perspectives on what kind of person they see as an ideal next leader of the organization. We have seen this happen effectively through surveys, town halls, or small group meetings. Clear communication and awareness of staff expectations early in the process will increase alignment, candor, and prevent uncomfortable surprises later on.

In recent years, there have been multiple examples of employee blowback in response to nonprofit CEO appointments, overshadowing and destabilizing a leader’s arrival. The ease with which employees can use social media to amplify their concerns as well as an increase in traditional media coverage of the social services sector is a new dynamic (and organizational risk) of which boards must be aware in their CEO search processes.

Create a formal role for staff

If appropriate, boards can create a formal role for the staff in the process by, for example, appointing employee representatives on the search committee or inviting them to sit in on interviews with finalists for the position. We have seen a number of approaches work well, all with trade-offs and downstream implications that need to be considered. Clear communication of expectations is key. For example, if a staff committee is established, the board needs to clearly charge the staff committee and define when the staff committee will engage in the process and what the board wants to receive from the staff committee (for example, a summary of the key strengths of the semi-finalists). There are two positive byproducts that typically occur: first, the board and staff build a shared understanding of the strategic direction for the organization and, second, the CEO can use this increased trust as a platform to get off to a positive start.

The board and staff build a shared understanding of the strategic direction for the organization.

When searching for a CEO, boards can and should take a few simple steps to balance their employees’ needs, insights, and perspectives with the board’s view of the leadership needs of the organization. Not only is staff input valuable, but a more open hiring process will increase the board’s chances of finding a leader who will be readily accepted and immediately effective in working toward everyone’s shared purpose.

About the authors

J.J. Cutler (jcutler@heidrick.com) is a managing partner of the Social Impact Practice within the CEO & Board Practice and a member of the Healthcare & Life Sciences and Marketing, Sales, and Strategy Officers practices; he is based in Heidrick & Struggles’ Philadelphia office.

Jackie Zavitz (jzavitz@heidrick.com) is the partner-in-charge of the Philadelphia office and a member of the Social Impact Practice within the CEO & Board Practice.

Related Services & Industries

Academia, Research & Education

Associations

Inclusive Leadership

Social Impact

Related Content

Healthcare Payers & Providers

Nonprofit healthcare boards: A mandate for change

Many boards of US nonprofit healthcare systems have held onto governance policies that most corporate boards abandoned long ago. Now, they are in urgent need of change if they are to continue to serve their communities effectively.

Human Resources Officers

The CHRO’s evolving role in the digital age

In this podcast, Holly Kortright, Senior Vice President of People at Ellucian, discusses how the CHRO role has evolved to being a business leader first, helping drive business success, and the company’s approach to attracting and retaining the best digital talent.

Boards & Governance

Association and nonprofit boards: Maximizing effective service

A survey of association and nonprofit board members explores what motivates directors to serve, how directors view their roles, and how the organizations they support can improve their experience.

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings