Disruption today in healthcare and life sciences | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Disruption today in healthcare and life sciences

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Healthcare Payers & Providers Disruption today in healthcare and life sciences

Heidrick & Struggles’ survey of senior executives in healthcare and life sciences reveals top drivers of disruption and potential solutions.

Heidrick & Struggles

Senior healthcare and life sciences executives are facing mounting disruptive pressure—fueled by technology, external innovation, and the cost of healthcare—and expect it to further increase in the coming 18 months. Of 166 senior executives surveyed, just over half (53%) say their companies are well prepared to weather the disruptions they anticipate, a hearteningly higher share than last year’s 45%. Furthermore, 53% say they expect to be a source of disruption in their industry, with the caliber of their people, the ability to work across organizational boundaries, and the ability to manage complexity as the keys drivers of their success.

These are among the findings of a new Heidrick & Struggles survey of 166 senior healthcare and life sciences leaders, including CEOs, C-suite executives, chairs, and board directors. (For more details about these respondents, see sidebar, “About the survey.”) The survey examined the most significant sources of disruption in the sector and how prepared companies are to respond. The findings further underscore that the right people and the right culture will be pivotal for companies to successfully prepare for the many disruptions coming to the forefront in healthcare and life sciences.

Key findings

Of those surveyed, 78% think their company faces more disruptive pressure today than it did 18 months ago, and 82% anticipate the pace of disruption in healthcare and life sciences to increase over the next 18 months. Yet just over half (53%) feel their company is well prepared to face market disruption.

Technology will be the most disruptive factor for life sciences companies, according to survey respondents. Close behind were external innovation and cost of healthcare.

The majority of respondents who said that their companies were well prepared for disruption noted their ability to work across organization boundaries as the top reason, followed by their ability to navigate the political and regulatory environment and their ability to manage complexity.

Among the 53% who say their company is a source of disruption, the top reason was the caliber of their people, followed by their ability to work across organizational boundaries and their ability to manage complexity.

There is some good news for the sector. These strengths are well suited to help manage some of the broad factors that senior healthcare and life sciences executives cite as significant sources of anticipated disruption and change to their company over the next 18 months: growing sophistication of lower-cost competitors, attracting and retaining millennials, and the essential need to work in nontraditional ways and break silos.

Indeed, nearly two-thirds (65%) agree that they are already breaking down silos and working together as one organization.

Executives indicate, though, that they need to do better. For example, only 45% say they spend enough time preparing for the future rather than “firefighting.” And though 79% say their company encourages innovation and disruptive thinking, nearly all (92%) agree they need to invest further in innovation. On people, just half (50%) of senior life sciences executives believe their company attracts the best people, and only 64% agree they have the right leaders for what they need to do. Executives also say they’re exploring both strategic and people-related tactics to combat disruption, most often citing reevaluation of strategic goals, followed closely by creation of new functions and M&A.

On the whole, sector executives are confident in their culture and their top teams’ ability to change as they seek the right moves. Notably, 72% say their culture matches their strategic imperatives, and 83% agree that it contributes significantly to their success in the market. Finally, 75% say the top team is aligned and makes bold decisions when needed. This confidence and alignment augurs well for the success of the companies that maintain it.

Sidebar: About the survey

Heidrick & Struggles conducted an online survey of 166 senior-level executives in the healthcare and life sciences sector to understand how organizations are preparing for and responding to market disruption. Respondents included CEOs and other C-suite executives, board members, presidents, partners/owners/principals, and other senior executives from companies in healthcare systems and services, pharmaceuticals and medical products, and private equity. This survey builds on previous Heidrick & Struggles research, including our work on accelerating performance, an in-depth examination of many of the world’s largest companies that highlights the attributes of top performers.

To learn about these findings in more detail, flip through the interactive report above or click the download button for the PDF.

About the contributors

Jimson Cheng (jcheng@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Healthcare & Life Sciences Practice for Asia Pacific and the Middle East; he is based in the Singapore office.

Andy MacLeod (amacleod@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of the Healthcare & Life Sciences Practice for Europe; he is based in the London office.

John Mitchell (jmitchell@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of the Healthcare & Life Sciences Practice; he is based in the Miami Beach office.

Related Services & Industries

Biopharmaceuticals

Leadership Development

Related Content

AI & Technology Officers

Embracing and sustaining a competitive advantage in AI: A conversation with José Pedro Almeida, advisory board member of Intelligence Ventures and top chief AI strategist

Top healthcare and AI strategist José Pedro Almeida, discusses the potential of generative AI and its impact on businesses and healthcare organizations worldwide.

Healthcare Payers & Providers

Microsoft’s Nuance Healthcare executive vice president & general manager on AI’s role in transforming patient care

Diana Nole, the executive vice president and general manager for Nuance's healthcare division, discusses balancing innovation and stability, and leadership capabilities for success.

Chief Executive Officer

What CEOs learn from board roles: An interview with Carsten Hellmann, CEO of ALK-Abelló and NED of Coloplast

Carsten Hellmann, the CEO of global pharmaceutical company ALK and non-executive director of healthcare technology company Coloplast, discusses the ways his role as a non-executive director has benefitted his job as CEO.

Healthcare Payers & Providers

Disruption in Healthcare and Life Sciences 2021

The fourth annual survey of healthcare and life sciences leaders shows a desire for stability and an accelerated shift toward business models that will help take their products to their customers in a digital-first world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings