CEO succession in turbulent times | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

CEO succession in turbulent times

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Boards & Governance CEO succession in turbulent times

When boards are faced with the crucial decision of selecting the next CEO, those that have started early and follow a rigorous process will have the best chance of finding the right leader.

Bonnie W. Gwin ,
Jeffrey S. Sanders

In the current environment of rapid change, CEO succession planning has become more challenging for boards. As industries are disrupted by new technology and economic and geopolitical shifts, and as shareholder pressure on companies increases, boards are having to think more broadly when selecting their future CEOs. CEO succession planning today requires ongoing analysis of how a company’s competitive landscape will change and what type of leader will be required to navigate the change. It requires ensuring that the current leadership team embraces change and is continually learning.

Companies struggle with CEO succession planning in part because their awareness of the importance of a robust and tailored CEO succession process is not necessarily paired with the specific expertise required to design and implement a plan.

Given sufficient time, most companies likely would opt for an internal candidate, and according to The Conference Board’s recently released 8th annual CEO Succession Practices  report, the appointment of internal candidates to the CEO position rose in 2018 to the highest level it had ever recorded, nearly 9 out of 10. That said, most boards want to look both inside and out before making a final decision. Many boards today opt to review, at minimum, a targeted external talent map to ensure they have compared the best of the outside talent pool with any internal candidates.

The context for CEO successions today

For both internal and external searches, there are several trends linking succession issues and strategic issues that are highlighted in the recently launched report and that particularly resonate with observations from our own extensive work with boards and CEOs:

Trend #1: With CEO tenure at a high, many CEOs will be leaving, leading to heightened competition for the best candidates. A trend toward longer tenures began in 2009, with tenure increasing almost every year during the past decade, reaching 10.2 years in 2018, after a record high of 10.9 in 2017. But we expect the recession generation of CEOs to be stepping down over the next several years, creating an opportunity—and a requirement—for many boards to clearly define the skills their next CEO will need in perhaps even more complex times.

Trend #2: Cultural considerations and softer skills are increasingly integral. Many stakeholders may have increased interest in creating a positive company culture in part driven by the many behavior- or ethics-related CEO departures in the past couple of years. However, more companies than ever are also focused on maintaining a healthy and inclusive corporate culture as a result of mounting evidence of a direct connection between culture, the bottom line, and critical reputational considerations. Most notably, great company cultures help attract and retain top talent.

Consequently, when creating the ideal profile for a CEO successor, boards are far more inclined than ever before to define the desired skills of their next CEO in a multidimensional way—including crucial soft leadership skills alongside more traditional attributes such as business-related skills and track record. Often, these softer skills relate to the ability to nurture a values-based, diverse, and inclusive organization; others may relate to specific organizational needs, such as the skills required to build a digital culture (for more, see “Building a digital culture” and “Building digital dexterity in your leadership team”).

Trend #3: Creating diverse leaders and teams is still a priority despite a recent decline. For example, out of a small base of only 25 female S&P 500 CEOs at the beginning of the year, 2018 saw the departure of four female CEOs and the addition of only one, netting out currently at 22. With such a small total number of female CEOs, it’s perhaps not surprising that any fluctuation in a given year is very noticeable. We are convinced, however, that most companies now understand the value of maintaining diverse leadership not just in terms of gender but also in areas such as racial and ethnic diversity, LGBTQ status, or leaders with disabilities.

So, it is heartening to witness demand from clients for diverse candidate slates in CEO searches and to see boards taking steps to build diverse slates. We recognize that our current optimism may be based more on anecdotal than empirical evidence, but we firmly believe there is a change underway and that progress has yet to be reflected in the data.

Getting started

Regardless of whether a board ultimately appoints an internal or external successor, a rigorous process will help ensure the best result, not only in the choice of CEO but also in ensuring the discipline needed for such a critical selection.

Such a process is helped by the fact that the science of leadership development has been advancing at a rapid pace, allowing organizations to identify leadership potential and build on it earlier and earlier in career paths. This also leaves more room for companies to consider candidates with different strengths and skill sets depending on which strategic shifts a company considers most likely. So, whether or not an individual candidate does become CEO, approaching an ongoing succession process in this way will build a strong leadership bench.

While there is no set formula for CEO succession, as boards face the challenge of developing and recruiting CEOs fit to lead in a new era, starting early, thinking about the context, and using a rigorous process will give all boards the best chance of ensuring a steady supply of capable leaders—ready to take on new challenges—at every level.

About the authors

Bonnie W. Gwin (bgwin@heidrick.com) is a vice chairman and co-managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ CEO & Board Practice; she is based in the New York office.

Jeff Sanders (jsanders@heidrick.com) is a vice chairman and co-managing partner of the CEO & Board Practice; he is based in the New York and San Francisco offices.

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Leadership Development

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings