Realising digital ambition through talent and culture | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Realising digital ambition through talent and culture

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Talent Strategy Management Realising digital ambition through talent and culture

Companies face a unique mix of cultural and strategic set of challenges in undertaking digital transformations to meet changing consumer demands and emerging digital competitors. Addressing these challenges starts with defining a clear digital ambition and the role talent plays in making it successful.

This article first appeared in the Q3 2019  issue of the SID Directors Bulletin published by the Singapore Institute of Directors.

Most companies understand the value a digital transformation can generate, but many struggle to capture its value. A recent Heidrick & Struggles survey of companies in the Asia-Pacific (APAC) region revealed that only 35 per cent are satisfied with the results of their current digital efforts.

The three biggest obstacles identified are lack of articulation of a digital strategy (39 per cent), lack of necessary talent (33 per cent), and moving too slowly (33 per cent).

The good news is that there is a significant appetite among APAC governments to help businesses go digital and future-proof their economies. For example, Singapore’s Government Technology Agency had indicated that S$2.8 billion of government infocomm technology contracts would be given out between April 2018 through to March 2019, a shade more than the previous year’s S$2.4 billion.

APAC companies, for their part, should focus not exclusively on technology but also on articulating a strategy, developing the workforce, and establishing a culture that accelerates progress.

A successful digital transformation takes a company from a traditional approach to customer experiences and operations to one where digital is used to innovate new approaches to existing tasks and processes, and to incubate new offerings and business models.

Moving target

The destination is inevitably a moving target, since new technologies are always emerging. By striving for digital acceleration, which can be defined as the ability to successfully develop and scale new digital initiatives across the business, companies can build the capabilities and infrastructure that will allow them to smoothly manage both current transformation projects and test future innovations in parallel.

Digitally accelerating organisations should take a few clear steps to achieve a well-defined and understood strategy for harnessing digital capabilities.

First, leaders should clarify their digital ambition. They can assess the future of their market by asking some basic questions—for example, what opportunities will exist to deliver step-change outcomes like a 10X improvement in customer value, what skills and capabilities they will need, and what the skills gap is likely to be. The answers will help them better articulate their digital ambition, the way it leverages their existing assets, and how to close the gaps.

Then leaders can begin to build the internal infrastructure to support that ambition by asking themselves: What will the journey look like, and how can processes be reworked to help along the way?

Lastly, to ensure they stay on track, organisations can measure their progress along the five stages of digital maturity and focus on developing their leadership, workforce, and culture to advance. (See box on “Measuring Digital Acceleration.”)

Investing in talent, skills, and capabilities

More often than not, talent is the limiting factor when pursuing digital acceleration. Only 23 per cent of APAC companies surveyed consider their digital talent strategy to be ideal, and 57 per cent believe they need a new or different talent base. The best approach starts at the top and reaches across the entire workforce.

While 33 per cent of companies say they create strategic roles such as a chief innovation officer or chief analytics officer to spur progress in their digital efforts, this move alone is not sufficient.

Though not all leaders need to be technical experts, every executive should be an effective driver of digital change. Indeed, the entire senior management should evolve their digital capabilities to match their company’s evolution (see box, “Shaping Clear C-suite Roles for Digital Acceleration”).

Transforming the workforce

Companies must also raise the digital dexterity of the entire workforce to truly build a long-term advantage. Organisations can support their employees in a number of ways:

Bring on external hires, partners, and freelancers who can fill current digital capability.
Balance institutional knowledge with new hires’ perspectives, and factor in the increased impact of automation on the workforce.
Look beyond acquiring designers, developers, and data scientists to anticipate critical emerging roles – for example, incubation managers or behavioural scientists.

Developing a supportive culture

Two aspects of culture are particularly important to digital acceleration.

First, companies should support and reward two types of innovation. “Big I” innovation is disruptive, looks to the future, and can fundamentally change the way a business operates. “Little i” innovation continually improves the core business.

Second, companies should also create a culture of continuous learning, in which people are encouraged to build new digital capabilities. When training is combined with support, communication, and knowledge sharing, the result is a workforce with the tools to innovate and solve problems more creatively.

Many enterprises have advantages they can use to protect and expand market share. In particular, APAC companies report a higher-than-global adoption of disruptive technologies such as the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, and conversational interfaces. This makes APAC an ideal test lab for new digital innovations that may be ahead of other regions.

But tech adoption alone will not create sufficient digital acceleration to win. The most successful APAC companies will build the capabilities to ensure they have the right talent at the right time as well as a culture that supports continuous learning and breakthrough innovation.

About the authors

Scott Snyder (ssnyder@heidrick.com) is the leader of Heidrick Consulting’s digital offering and a partner in the Philadelphia office. He is a senior fellow at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and the coauthor of Goliath’s Revenge.

Christopher Uhrinek (cuhrinek@heidrick.com) is a principal in the Singapore office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

On-Demand Talent

Overcoming organizational inertia with interim leaders and experts

Stop gambling on the status quo. Learn how to quantify the price of doing nothing and audit internal capacity gaps to ignite strategic growth.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings