2025 North America Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2025 North America Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Private Equity 2025 North America Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles' annual survey of investment professionals in North America explores recent compensation data and trends across private equity.
November 19, 2025

Jonathan Goldstein ,
John Rubinetti

Explore the full report
Open the PDF

Welcome to our 2025 North America Private Equity Compensation Survey. This report provides a comprehensive picture of the compensation that North American private equity executives are currently receiving.

For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled compensation data from a survey of 656 investment professionals in North America.

We hope you enjoy reading the survey, which remains the only one of its kind. As always, suggestions are welcome, so please feel free to contact us—or your Heidrick & Struggles representative—with questions and comments.

Executive summary

The market for private equity professionals—already highly selective—is becoming even more competitive, despite deal activity slowing down.

Firms are looking for highly qualified candidates with recent, relevant closed-deal experience who can grow what is usually a small operation. Candidates are looking for growth as well, especially opportunities with room for a win and a good firm culture. Candidates are paying particular attention to how deployed the firm’s most current fund is, its distributions to paid-in capital (DPI), its deal track record, and its fundraising track record. This translates to a market where top-tier candidates enjoy abundant opportunities, while those lower on the ladder see little to no movement.

Hiring activity for private equity professionals continues to be driven predominantly by firms that have recently raised capital or that plan to raise capital. We are also seeing activity from new strategies within existing firms and firms upgrading their teams.

The pace of the hiring market has been uneven. This year started out as busy as we have seen it in recent memory, then slowed, and then picked up with a vengeance in the beginning of September and has not abated. We are seeing activity at all levels—VP to managing partner.

We have seen growth in areas apart from firms raising larger funds. Private Equity started to become institutionalized in the 1980s. Very few firms have planned for or resolved their succession issues. As a result, we have seen an increase in activity from investment professionals who have left to start their own funds.

We have also seen an increase in hiring into certain areas that were traditionally seen as solely residing in the LP’s domain (secondaries, CVs, GP stakes, mid-hold, etc.). We have also seen an increasing interest from our clients in recruiting GPs into these roles. GPs, in turn, have also begun to flock to this space, given its growth.

Compensation trends

Survey results show that compensation for private equity professionals has continued to rise year-over-year, with base salaries and bonuses trending upward across most roles. However, for 2025, half of respondents said their base compensation increase was 10% or less, and three-quarters reported that bonuses remained discretionary rather than formulaic.

These compensation increases were evident across all firm sizes, particularly for associates, vice presidents, principals, and directors. Base pay rose steadily from 2023 through 2025, while compensation for managing partners showed more volatility. A similar pattern emerged in bonus payouts.

Total cash compensation in the upper quartile also tended to scale with assets under management (AUM) in 2024, highlighting a correlation between firm size and pay at the top end of the spectrum.

While the upper quartile of male associates and analysts earned more total cash compensation in 2024 than female associates and analysts, women in more senior roles tended to outperform their male counterparts.

For full compensation data, download the full report.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank Mohd Arsalan for his contributions to this report.

About the authors

Jonathan Goldstein (jgoldstein@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of the Private Equity Practice in the Americas; he is based in the New York office.

John Rubinetti (jrubinetti@heidrick.com) is a member of the global Private Equity Practice; he is based in the New York and Miami offices.

Related Services & Industries

Private Equity

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings