Why interim management is rising in UK consumer markets | Perspectives | Heidrick & Struggles

Why interim management is rising in UK consumer markets

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

On-Demand Talent Why interim management is rising in UK consumer markets

Amid cost pressures and rapid digital change, consumer brands in the UK are pivoting to agile, leaner staffing. Demand for interim leaders has jumped 310% since 2020 to drive urgent change, digital acceleration, and operational resilience.

Olly Hampson

December 16, 2025
5m to read

Upheaval in the consumer landscape is impacting hiring trends, with interim experts and leaders offering an attractive blend of flexibility and instant access to transformation skills.

Transformation is occurring across the consumer markets industry, forced onwards by the convergence of competing, contradictory pressures. Tight margins and rising costs, higher consumer expectations, international trade disputes, and ongoing, rapid tech developments mean consumer brands must upgrade or be left behind. Business strategy, operations, staffing, supply chains, digital and AI capability, and omnichannel consumer reach all have to be optimized if businesses are to generate growth in a contracting space.

Specialized talent are needed to handle the complexity of these multi-front change management programs—and they're needed now. As a result, we’re seeing consumer companies embracing the independent talent model, engaging interim leadership with high-level expertise to help them navigate disruption while identifying and exploiting new opportunities to drive growth, build resilience and stay relevant in a challenging market.

A transformative staffing shift

Rising employment costs combined with sluggish economic growth are causing UK businesses to rethink their hiring strategies. The increase in employers’ National Insurance rates announced in October 2024’s Budget and concerns over the impact of the Employment Rights Bill in particular are suppressing the appetite to hire, causing the country’s labor market to noticeably cool in recent months.

ONS data reveals that the estimated number of available vacancies is down by 42,000 from February to April 2025, while payroll employment dropped by 109,000 in May—the steepest monthly decline, excluding the pandemic, since 2014. Across all sectors, there’s a shift to a short-term workforce, with the number of temporary workers rising by 7.4% year-over-year in the first quarter of 2025, reaching 1.56 million.

Consumer-facing firms are on the frontline of these employment trends. With UK retail sales growth slowing to just 1% year-on-year in May—failing to match inflation and signaling weak discretionary spending – there is no margin for extra staffing expenditure. Major retailers are slimming down, with Sainsburys planning to cut 3,000 jobs, and Morrisons and PrettyLittleThing both implementing redundancies across their operations. International organizations and consumer goods giants are also feeling the bite, with Unilever embarking on a cost-cutting restructure as part of its effort to save €800m, which sees it shedding 7,500 roles worldwide.

These moves are part of a wider transformative shift in workforce strategies across the UK, Europe, and the US, with organizations reducing long-term payroll commitments to focus on a leaner, more resilient model based on temporary contracts and flexible, agile hiring models.

The time and place for interim executive talent

This reassessment of how talent are sourced and deployed in an unpredictable business environment extends to executive level, where on-demand and hybrid talent are enabling companies to fill skills gaps efficiently and so quickly adapt to economic changes while maintaining productivity. Research from Business Talent Group, a Heidrick & Struggles company, shows that in the US and European consumer markets, demand for interim leaders at all levels has jumped by 310% since 2020.

Independent talent are particularly suited to transformation programs, and it’s no surprise that respondents to the INIMA (International Network of Interim Manager Associations) annual survey in 2025 cited change management and process optimization as the most common focus for recent assignments. The top three specialties of European interim managers across all sectors are general management at 30.4%, finance (10.5%), and operations (10.4%).

Experienced executives are being brought into consumer organizations to lead critical transformation efforts—such as ecommerce expansion, ESG compliance and supply chain optimization—while allowing businesses to avoid the delays and costs associated with permanent hires. Business Talent Group's data shows a strong focus on digital transformation, with the demand for AI and machine learning talent jumping 33% year-on-year, with business intelligence and analytics projects the priority. Strategy-related work is also key, seeing a 39% increase in requirements year-on-year, with supply chains, manufacturing strategy, and financial controls all significant targets for on-demand talent.

A win-win outcome

Within evolving employment structures, interim executive roles provide immediate access to leadership and industry expertise, helping consumer brands maintain momentum during periods of change and transition. The ability to inject fresh, specialized perspectives is proving particularly valuable in shaping customer-centric strategies that maximize engagement in a congested space where competitors clamor for consumers’ attention. Alongside this, companies are not having to commit to long-term executive contracts during a period of financial uncertainty.

There are also benefits from the perspective of interim talent. Flexible employment models align with changing worker expectations of greater control of their time and development paths. Many professionals now prioritize autonomy, varied experiences, and work-life balance over traditional job security. This is reshaping what employees look for in employers and how they engage with their careers.

With 2025 proving to be a period of transformation, rewards are on offer for independent talent who can demonstrate adaptability, innovation, and strategic focus, and upskill themselves to enable the adoption of AI and digital tools. By offering varied, shorter-term opportunities, organizations can attract these high-caliber professionals, boosting their ability to grow in a competitive market.

Related content

Leadership assurance: The role of interim leaders in supporting companies through change and disruption

Allen Mueller
,
Todd Taylor

Allen Mueller, Todd Taylor

12m to read Article

Interim leadership: A lifeline for the UK industrials sector

Josh Doyle

Josh Doyle

5m to read Article

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings