Association and nonprofit boards: Maximizing effective service | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Association and nonprofit boards: Maximizing effective service
Explore this page Read the full reportKey findingsAbout the authorsRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Boards & Governance Association and nonprofit boards: Maximizing effective service

A survey of association and nonprofit board members explores what motivates directors to serve, how directors view their roles, and how the organizations they support can improve their experience.

Julian Ha ,
David Rehr

Association and nonprofit boards: Maximizing effective service

Read the full report

This country would not be what it is without the volunteer spirit of its people. At the highest level, associations and nonprofits, run by their executive teams and boards of directors, are focused on valuable missions. They strive to better society as a whole, expand economic opportunities, eliminate crippling diseases, provide for those who cannot provide for themselves, and offer education and development opportunities to their constituencies, among other undertakings.

On the heels of last year’s report, Association CEOs: Leading through Change, a new survey builds on our knowledge of association management, widening the lens to look at the broader picture of influential associations as well as nonprofits in a variety of industries. We surveyed more than 500 board members of industry trade associations, professional societies, charitable causes, religious orders, fraternal organizations, and local civic organizations across North America to get an insider’s perspective on what actually happens in the boardrooms of these vital organizations.

Key findings

The results are striking. Importantly, although our survey respondents reported spending an average of 172 hours a year in service—more than 3 hours a week—92% feel the commitment is a good use of their professional time. This goodwill is reflected in the reasons directors choose to serve: 91% said they support the mission of the organization, and 68% agree with the statement “I believe I could make the organization more effective with my board involvement.”

However, there are clear areas for improvement in the board experience. Our survey suggests that the onboarding process for many boards needs further development to ensure board members are fully equipped to contribute during their term. Fewer than half of respondents said their organization’s onboarding experience properly prepared them to be an effective board member. The current tendency toward informal and inconsistent processes could be hampering the effectiveness of new board members and the appeal of board service overall.

In addition to parsing the survey results, the report offers practical advice for association and nonprofit leadership, as well as firsthand accounts of best practices provided by Marlene Colucci, executive director of The Business Council, and Scott Melville, CEO of the Consumer Healthcare Products Association.

About the authors

Julian Ha (jha@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Washington D.C. office and leads the Associations sector.

Bill Hudson (bhudson@heidrick.com) is a senior advisor to the Associations sector.

David Rehr is a professor of the Antonin Scalia Law School at George Mason University.

Related Services & Industries

Associations

Board Effectiveness

Nonprofits & NGOs

Social Impact

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings