2025 Family Offices Compensation Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2025 Family Offices Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

2025 Family Offices Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ first survey of family office investment professionals in the US and Europe examines compensation trends, demographics, structures, and asset class focus.

January 15, 2026

Renee Neri ,
Daniel Aghdami

Open the survey

Methodology

In an online survey, we asked participants to report their base compensation for 2025, 2024, and 2023; the value of cash bonuses and equity received in 2024 and 2023; and their anticipated bonus for 2025. They also provided information about any additional incentives received, their organizations, and their demographic backgrounds. All data are self-reported and presented in aggregate form.

On confidentiality

Heidrick & Struggles' 2025 Family Office Compensation Survey was conducted anonymously.

Welcome to Heidrick & Struggles’ first survey of executive compensation at family offices, which gathered data from 106 family office investors in the United States and Europe. It explores compensation trends for these professionals, looking at demographics, asset classes invested in, and organizational structure.

This report is part of a long-standing series of compensation surveys focusing on compensation trends for leaders of privately held organizations of all types, and our inaugural survey focused specifically on CIOs and senior investment professionals at larger family offices.

We hope you enjoy reading the report. We welcome suggestions; please feel free to contact us with any questions or comments.

An industry poised for substantial growth

Family offices stand as enduring legacies of entrepreneurial and financial success. Today, they are evolving to manage an expanding set of responsibilities—extending beyond investment oversight to encompass multi-generational wealth stewardship, estate and tax planning, philanthropy, and the broader pursuit of family purpose and continuity over time.

The financial influence and societal relevance of family offices continue to expand. An estimated $84 trillion in family wealth is expected to transfer across generations over the next two decades, positioning family offices as the critical bridge between today’s stewards of capital and the next generation of wealth holders. As these transitions unfold, the balance among wealth preservation, value creation, and social impact will continue to evolve, reshaping how family offices define success and deliver on their purpose.

Meeting this moment requires leadership of a different caliber: executives with the strategic foresight, investment sophistication, and governance acumen to navigate increasing complexity, while aligning financial outcomes with the family’s long-term values and legacy.

At the same time, the number of family offices worldwide is rapidly growing. The population of stand-alone family offices has increased from roughly 6,000 just six years ago to more than 8,000 today, and projections suggest that figure could approach 11,000 by 2030. This expansion will intensify competition for the experienced executives capable of leading these organizations effectively. As a result, compensation strategy will be central to attracting and retaining the next generation of family office leadership talent.

For full compensation data, download the full report.

About the authors

Renee Neri (rneri@heidrick.com) is a partner and global head of the Family Capital Practice; she is based in the New York office.

Daniel Aghdami (daghdami@heidrick.com) is a partner and head of the Family Capital Practice in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa; he is based in the Zurich office.

Related Services & Industries

Family Capital

Private Equity

Wealth & Asset Management

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings