How to leave a job gracefully | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

How to leave a job gracefully
Explore this page Key findings include the following:About the authorRelated Content

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Human Resources Officers How to leave a job gracefully

A Heidrick & Struggles survey collects the advice of more than 700 human resources officers and transitioning executives on how best to move into a new role.

Kelly O. Kay

Related

3 Mistakes Executives Make When Telling People That They’re Leaving

Advice about how to secure a position at a new company is plentiful, but little has been said about how to leave your current company the right way. Even less has been done in the way of research. To close that gap, we undertook a national survey of more than 600 senior executives who have voluntarily left their employers and more than 100 senior human resources officers who manage such transitions. We asked respondents about best and worst practices in voluntary resignations, the career consequences of the manner in which someone exits, and best practices in preparing for a new job. The results of our research, detailed in this report, can help transitioning executives make their exit with forethought and tact, enhancing their reputation and their career.

Key findings include the following:

The overwhelming majority of respondents (84% of HR leaders, 81% of transitioning executives) agree that leaving one’s job poorly will adversely affect one’s future career.
The chief adverse consequences of a clumsy departure, say HR leaders and transitioning executives alike, are a damaged reputation and strained relations with former mentors and colleagues.
Among the worst mistakes that people make in transitions, the most frequently cited was “criticizing the company, the boss, management, or colleagues during the transition.”

About the author

Kelly O. Kay (kokay@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ San Francisco office; he leads the firm’s global software group.

Acknowledgments

The author wishes to thank Katarina Dempsey and Kunal Sarkar for their contributions to this report.

Related Services & Industries

CEO Succession Planning

Human Resources Officers

Technology

Technology Services

Related Content

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

Executive Assessment

Leadership assurance: Elevating learning and development as a strategic driver of workforce planning

Learn how HR leaders can link learning and development to board priorities to strengthen succession, retain key talent, and build future-ready capabilities.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings