Board Monitor Europe 2018 | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Board Monitor Europe 2018

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Boards & Governance Board Monitor Europe 2018

Our second annual profile of new independent directors at the largest British, French, and German companies captures the evolution of European boards at a time of continuing uncertainty in the region and around the world.

Heidrick & Struggles

Board Monitor Europe 2018

Read the full report

In 2017, leading companies in the top three European countries by GDP—France, Germany, and the United Kingdom—filled 301 vacant board seats. These new directors and their boards face a challenging agenda of geopolitical and business issues that could significantly affect company strategy and operations.

Geopolitical issues include what a post-Brexit Europe will look like, nationalist legislation in individual EU countries, US tariffs on European goods, and the rising threat of protectionism around the world. Meanwhile, in virtually every industry, ongoing digitization and the race to employ artificial intelligence will pose significant challenges of disruption. The relentless war for top talent will likely increase boards’ involvement in succession beyond the CEO level. Greater regulatory scrutiny domestically and from the European Union will demand increased compliance, exemplary corporate governance, and a commitment to corporate social responsibility as well as to the creation of long-term value.

Board Monitor Europe 2018 is the second in our annual series of reports designed to provide profiles of new independent directors and track changes in those profiles from year to year.1

Our analysis surfaced the following key findings:

Of the 301 new independent seats on the boards of FTSE 250, CAC 40, and DAX 30 companies in 2017, 58% went to current and former CEOs and CFOs, down from 70% the previous year.
Some 200, or 66%, of those seats were filled by directors with previous board experience, down from 76% in 2016.
Of those 301 seats, 110, or 37%, went to women, down from 44% in 2016.
Only 1 of the 301 seats were filled by appointees with experience in cyberrisk, and only 10 by appointees with digital or social media experience.
Some 105, or 35%, of new seats went to non-national appointees, down from 48% in 2016.
Overall, the largest share of total substantial industry experiences lay in the financial services sector, at 34%, up from 26% in 2016.
The percentage of non-national appointees varied widely by country—from a high of 50% in Germany to 40% in France and 32% in the United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom, the largest share of new appointees (36%) went to financial services boards. In France, the largest share (51%) went to industrial boards, and in Germany, the largest share went to industrial boards (36%) and financial services boards (36%).

References

1 By “independent” we mean those directors who primarily represent shareholders, whether they serve on supervisory boards in a two-tier board structure or on a unitary board, and excludes company executives and employee and government representatives.

Related Services & Industries

Inclusive Leadership

Related Content

Board of Directors

Board effectiveness focus: One ounce of prevention

Four steps boards can take to mitigate activist campaigns before the first letter arrives.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on the 2025 appointees to the corporate boards of the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings