Private Equity Focus | Succession Planning Solutions

Identified Country:

Private equity focus: A new process for CEO succession planning in a new normal

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Private Equity Private equity focus: A new process for CEO succession planning in a new normal

Private equity leaders often treat CEO succession as an afterthought. Our survey research shines a light on three key areas of improvement.
October 23, 2025

Gustavo Alba ,
Stephen Schwanhausser

Discover more

Read the full report PDF

CEO succession planning is a critical indicator of organizational foresight and future performance, widely regarded as one of the key responsibilities of boards. However, recent Heidrick & Struggles surveys of CEOs and board members around the world1 have found that leaders at private equity (PE)-backed companies place a lower priority on CEO succession planning than their peers at public companies—28% of board members we surveyed at these firms say that they consider CEO succession planning only on an emergency basis.

This tracks with PE firms’ traditional approach, but it has persisted through a fundamental change in the landscape for PE portfolio company leadership:2 longer exit timelines mean that PE investors are now having to think more like operators, which means creating value through operations and, often, experiencing more leadership changes than they have been used to. Indeed, today over 70% of CEOs at PE-backed companies are replaced during an average hold period of five and a half to six years. Our own experience and conversations with private equity leaders show that a more established and robust succession planning process— one integrated into an overall talent strategy— will best-position PE firms for success.

Drawing on data gathered from Heidrick & Struggles surveys conducted in 2024 and 2025 of CEOs and board members around the world, this report explores current approaches to succession planning at PE-backed companies and what these leaders can do to best position their organizations for the future in the current environment.

Top succession planning priority today

Globally, across all ownership structures, 26% of CEOs and board members say that CEO succession is among their top priorities and is treated as such. However, only 16% of respondents from PE-backed companies say the same.

In a companion survey, we found that PE-backed company respondents less frequently say there is alignment between CEO and board succession planning and strategic planning in their company than their peers at public companies. For example, respondents from PE firms say they develop the senior leadership team with an eye to CEO succession about half as frequently as respondents from public companies.

Respondents at PE-backed companies also say that open conversations about succession planning are not a common part of their operating norms. Only about a third, for example, report that discussions about CEO or director succession are expected, encouraged, and pursued on an ongoing basis. This is roughly half the share of leaders at public companies who report the same.

Further, because most PE portfolio company boards are typically comprised of investment professionals and people with sector expertise, these boards often lack directors who have experience with CEO succession planning compared with traditional public-company boards.

A major challenge regarding succession planning at PE-backed companies, our surveys found, is the high level of uncertainty about who is responsible for succession planning among the portfolio company’s board, the board chair, the firm’s head of talent, or investment professionals.

Taken together, our survey results point to a lack of integration of strategic oversight and talent practices as the primary factor behind why CEO succession is so often overlooked at PE-backed companies.

Increasing investment in succession planning

There are some encouraging signs that PE-backed companies are doing more to focus on succession planning and treat it as an important part of their long-term business strategy. Nearly half of respondents (45%) from PE-backed companies say they have increased investment in succession planning. Their reasons for doing so most often include the increasing expectations of CEOs and board members, which are aligned with what leaders at public companies say. In private equity, longer exit timelines are one contributor to these increased expectations of portfolio company CEOs; many companies have also been responding to a widening risk environment, greater regulatory attention, and director and CEO candidates who are insisting on improved discipline.3

Looking ahead: Borrowing from corporate to benefit PE

Regardless of where PE leaders choose to start, clarity regarding the succession planning process, the responsibilities of each person, and agreement on the importance of succession planning to overall value creation and strategy is of the utmost importance.

We have seen that the private equity firms that do this well have centralized talent functions and treat talent strategy and management as core drivers of value creation. We have three key recommendations for PE firms looking to improve their CEO succession strategies.

Assume and plan for at least one CEO succession per portfolio hold period

The likelihood of the CEO at the beginning of the investment being retained throughout the hold period has been less than 20% for more than a decade now. Additionally, multiple studies have shown that replacing a CEO typically extends the hold period by an average of six to 12 months, and these transitions can incur substantial costs for PE firms in delayed and unmet value creation. Given this business reality, it is prudent for PE boards plan for at least one CEO replacement throughout the hold period.

Implement portfolio-level, fit-for-purpose CEO succession planning to avoid conflicts of interest

In most cases, the replacement CEO in a portfolio company will be an external hire, brought in to improve performance—often due to a lack of confidence in the existing leadership. This means asking the sitting CEO or chief people officer to manage this process creates an obvious conflict of interest (unlike longer term planned successions seen at other types of companies). In addition, PE firms that centralize CEO succession planning with targeted, periodic market mapping of “ready now” talent are often best suited to minimize business disruption.

Conduct CEO succession planning proactively and continuously

Most public boards discuss CEO succession planning annually if not more frequently. Most PE-backed organizations, however, do so only on an as-needed basis. Periodically scanning the available talent market, combined with robust CEO performance management, ensures that PE firms have a more extensive set of options when they want to make a change.

Although CEO succession planning is a lower priority for PE-backed companies than public companies, the higher rate of CEO turnover in PE today, combined with the shifting talent landscape and volatile market conditions, means that a stronger focus on longer-term leadership assurance will better prepare these organizations for a present and future in which more is at stake, more is uncertain, and more is expected of the CEO than ever before. We believe that an ongoing approach to succession planning, with a broader set of selection, evaluation, development, and replacement activities for both the CEO and board, will best position companies for the future, whether private or public.4

About the authors

Gustavo Alba (galba@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Miami and New York City offices and a co-global managing partner of the Private Equity Practice.

Jason Henderson (jhenderson@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ New York office and leads the Private Equity Practice for Heidrick Consulting.

Stephen Schwanhausser (sschwanhausser@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Stamford office and a co-global managing partner of the Private Equity Practice.

References

1 An online survey of CEOs and board members conducted in June and July 2024 garnered 1,702 respondents across sectors and markets around the world. Another online survey of CEOs and board members conducted in spring of 2025 garnered 522 respondents across sectors and markets around the world.

2 For more on assessing CEO candidates, see Jason Henderson and Amanda Worthington, “The landscape for hiring a PE operating company CEO is changing fast—hire for “how” to navigate it successfully,” Heidrick & Struggles, https://www.heidrick.com/en/pages/private-equity/the-landscape-for-hiring-a-pe-operating-company-ceo-is-changing-fast.

3 “Route to the Top | Today’s CEO: The growing importance of character, learning, and leading in a contested world,” Heidrick & Struggles, February 28, 2024, heidrick.com

4 “Route to the Top | Today’s CEO: The growing importance of character, learning, and leading in a contested world,” Heidrick & Struggles, February 28, 2024, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Private Equity

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings