Leading across boundaries: Why CEOs and board members see this capability as a strategic asset | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Leading across boundaries: Why CEOs and board members see this capability as a strategic asset

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

CEO Succession Planning Leading across boundaries: Why CEOs and board members see this capability as a strategic asset

A survey of more than 500 CEOs and board members in markets around the world finds that a majority see the ability to lead across boundaries as foundational to achieving their organization’s strategic goals.
October 07, 2025

Jeremy C. Hanson ,
Jonathan McBride

Open the PDF

About the research

Heidrick & Struggles conducted this survey online in May and June 2025 and gathered responses from 522 CEOs and board members in Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The companies they represent had a minimum of $500 million in annual revenue; 28% had $5 billion or more. The companies span all sectors and ownership types.

Earlier this year, we asked board directors and CEOs in markets around the world about the importance of leading and governing across boundaries—both familiar internal boundaries, such as business units and functions, and boundaries created by competing and sometimes deeply held personal values of employees, customers, and other stakeholders. This kind of leadership is not new to corporate executives, of course. They have long needed to balance across internal divisions—finance versus sales, business unit versus enterprise priorities, global versus local needs. Indeed, the promise of job security, financial rewards, and, for some, wealth creation has often motivated employers and employees alike to find ways to set aside political, social, and personal differences in pursuit of common goals. Business leaders have also generally heeded calls to play roles in meeting societal needs such as wars, economic recessions and depressions, or pandemics, crossing boundaries of competition or nationality to do so.

Today, in our fractured and hyperconnected world, expectations for business leaders are higher than ever1 and divides are harder to bridge. Yet two-thirds of the directors and CEOs we surveyed say that being able to do so is foundational to meeting their strategic goals.

Lasting success in any attempt to lead across boundaries tends to require what we have come to call “arenas”: trusted spaces where people can express their differences and agree on how to move toward an outcome not all will agree with but everyone will respect. Business arenas, from board meetings to open town halls to informal gatherings, are far less heralded than sports or political arenas but are at least equally important. The reasons the directors and CEOs we surveyed see leading across boundaries as foundational to meeting their strategic goals, and the ways they are trying to do so, suggest considerations for all leaders today.

View the PDF of the report to explore the reasons.

Read our complementary article to dig deeper into four approaches to leading across boundaries and how they vary by market, company ownership, sector, and size.

About the authors

Jeremy Hanson (jhanson@heidrick.com) is a partner in the global CEO & Board of Directors Practice and chair of the Heidrick & Struggles Center for Leadership Assurance. He is based in the Chicago office.

Jonathan McBride (jmcbride@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of the Inclusive Leadership Practice. He is based in the Los Angeles office.

Reference

1 2025 Edelman Trust Barometer, Edelman, 2025, edelman.com.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Chief Executive Acceleration

Inclusive Leadership

Organization & Culture

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top US 2026 | Closing the CEO capability gap

Fortune 500 companies are increasingly appointing new CEOs who have prior experience in the role. However, a new survey finds that more than a third of US companies still don’t have a CEO with the capabilities the company needs to succeed in the near term. Some companies are planning their CEO successions more comprehensively and seeing greater success.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top 2026: Interactive data dashboard

Explore our data on sitting CEOs at the largest companies in 28 markets around the world.

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings