Chief People Officer Monitor | Strategic HR Operations

Identified Country:

Chief people officer monitor: Building HR functions that are effective and strategically influential

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Human Resources Officers Chief people officer monitor: Building HR functions that are effective and strategically influential

CPOs say their functions are, on the whole, moderately successful at both traditional HR activities and having strategic influence, according to a recent survey and insights from leading CPOs in markets around the world. The research suggests a few priorities for focus as CPOs reshape their functions for the future.
September 24, 2025

Jennifer Wilson ,
Brad Warga

Discover more

Open the PDF

Chief people officers’ core job is making sure their organization has the talent it needs to deliver. Yet CPOs aren’t notably confident that their company’s executive attraction, retention, development, and succession planning processes are positioning them well for the future—and neither are CEOs and board members.1

A recent survey of 600 CPOs in markets around the world found that CPOs are, in many ways, still focused on a view of their function as a utility for the company, rather than as a strategic enabler. But the playbook for what were once known as “academy” HR companies—the exemplars of success—doesn’t meet the needs of organizations today, as so much is changing so fast. A strategic lens and strategic influence are now crucial to ensuring companies have the talent they need, which we have explored in depth elsewhere.2

So, it’s encouraging that the survey—and follow-up conversations with some leading CPOs—also suggest some steps CPOs can take to become highly effective at traditional HR activities and highly influential in helping the company achieve its strategic goals.

Most notably, it’s clear that effectiveness and influence go hand in hand. CPOs can’t thrive by building a function that gets the nuts and bolts right in the hope of it serving as a foundation for later strategic success. Nor can they thrive by diving in at the top, without focusing on making sure people get hired and paid and stay engaged.

CPOs need to focus in three areas, the data suggests, to develop a function that will be able to deliver on both levels. CPOs themselves also highlight a few key capabilities that will help them grow.

HR is doing okay today—but has significant room for improvement

CPOs most often see their organizations as having credibility in the business, and least often as good at tracking external trends.

CPOs generally rate their effectiveness at traditional HR functions as average.

And, on the whole, CPOs say they have moderate influence on the company’s ability to meet most strategic goals.

Taken together, it’s clear that CPOs think their functions have a lot of room for improvement, not only on meeting newer strategic demands but also in the traditional areas they have long focused on.

Do CPOs still see their function as a utility?

In our experience, many companies stopped making large investments in talent management in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis; some have never returned to investing at pre-2008 levels.

That means that for half or more of most CPOs’ careers, they have been working in a cost-constrained environment, even as expectations and challenges have expanded exponentially.
Today, survey respondents report that HR budgets typically range from 0.35% to 0.75% of overall company revenue, averaging just 0.61%—a relatively small share given the increasing complexity and strategic demands placed on the function.
Ninety-three percent of CPOs agree that it’s right that they are most often evaluated on metrics tied to traditional functional priorities, including employee engagement and cost effectiveness.

Even among the 7% of CPOs who think other metrics would better evaluate success, the metrics they choose instead are still tied to traditional HR goals and not directly related to driving business success.

Yet many CPOs also know there are more strategically focused metrics that would better showcase their value and perhaps encourage more investment. Talent density is one metric that comes up frequently in our conversations. CPOs who responded to the survey added that:

“The loss of revenue due to people management has increased the importance of people management skills. I think this is a powerful showcase on the value proposition of the CPO.”
“When we started focusing more on employee development and career paths, HR’s involvement in long-term planning became clear. The board now recognizes HR’s strategic value.”

What’s holding back change?

One reason, we believe, is that the majority of CPOs have spent their entire career in HR, and too many have not had the time or resources to explore and advocate for alternatives.

But even CPOs who come from other backgrounds view traditional KPIs as the right measures of their performance.

The bigger issue—and one that should be encouraging for CPOs seeking to build functions that will be fit for future purpose—is that no one else has taken the time to make the links between business strategy, HR strategy, and metrics either. As one leading CPO told us, “When you have greater credibility, when the CEO wants you in the room all the time, when they’re talking behind closed doors about the value your function is adding, then the board reaches out to you.” So, if CPOs can improve performance in an area that is also a board priority, they should be able to build their case for broader influence and budget, from which more relevant KPIs will follow. The place to start, we think, is at the core of their mission: executive attraction, retention, development, and succession planning.

When CPOs have bigger ambitions, they get better at everything

To succeed as a CPO today, it’s crucial not to stay confined to the traditional HR lane. Building enterprise-wide credibility often means stepping into broader organizational challenges. That kind of leadership gets noticed—by the CEO, the board, and peers— and it opens the door to greater influence beyond just HR. Over time, you’re not just the person presenting on succession planning or employee engagement; you’re the person the board seeks out for insight. However, influence doesn’t automatically come with the CPO title. You earn it by adding real value and doing the right things.

One CPO who responded to the survey provided this insight: “To drive meaningful change, alignment with the CEO’s goals, particularly revenue and EBITDA targets, is crucial. Quarterly board meeting agendas focus on strategic priorities tied to these goals, with pre-socialized feedback ensuring efficient decision-making. HR must transition from traditional HR activities, such as performance management and surveys, to aligning its initiatives with the CEO’s objectives, such as fostering a culture of continuous feedback and cascading goals from the top. Additionally, HR should provide technology-related tools to support alignment and facilitate progress, solidifying its role as a strategic partner.”

One leading CPO we spoke with recalled a time when the product teams at her company weren’t working well with the GTM teams, resulting in products not being launched well. She took on coordination, had weekly calls, and got others, like the customer success team, involved. Doing this earned enterprise-wide credibility as well as the trust of key decision makers.

However, none of that matters if your HR house isn’t in order. It’s essential to prioritize operational fundamentals, such as filling critical roles and having the right team structure, and where around the world to find the talent you need, in addition to tackling strategic frameworks like competency models. Many CPOs miss this, but they will be held accountable if the basics aren’t covered, regardless of any broader contributions they make. Building a strong, trusted team, pulling not just from HR but from business and consulting backgrounds, is key to delivering results. The goal should be to expand, not to replace traditional skills.

What it takes to be a strategic CPO today

A strategic CPO is the intersection of influence and effectiveness, and our survey finds that these most often rise together, not sequentially. In other words, CPOs don’t become effective and then become influential as a result. They build both simultaneously. The path to strategic influence for CPOs is not simply about adding new strategic items to their plate, but about executing existing responsibilities—such as talent attraction, management, retention, and learning and development—exceptionally well and elevating them by linking them to future growth, competitive differentiation, and enterprise risk management.

The survey data identifies three attributes of the HR function that are top predictors of both influence and effectiveness:

Agility
The ability to adopt new technologies effectively
Being important to the organization’s management of material risks

Fewer than half of CPOs strongly agree their function is good at any of these today, suggesting that to bolster the function’s overall strength, these are a good place to start.

The CPOs we talked with also highlighted a few specific skills CPOs themselves need today that go beyond traditional HR expertise.

Understanding of the business. Effective leaders at any organization must have solid foundational knowledge about how the company works. This should not be limited to overall strategic or performance goals, but also include topics such as how the business units work, how products are developed and launched, and what the organization’s key challenges are at present. They also should understand the priorities of their peer C-level leaders at the organization.

Understanding of the global workforce. Leaders who have an understanding of where to source cost-effective and quality talent outside the United States will be indispensable for future company success.

First-principle thinking. What we hear CEOs asking for most often today in terms of CPO capabilities is first-principle thinking—for example, starting without assumptions, being data driven, and intellectually curious.

Technology capabilities. More and more of CPOs’ work in any industry involves building or buying technology, especially as it relates to recruiting and performance management. AI and data are also becoming increasingly important in all realms of business. This means that CPOs need to be digitally fluent enough to at least ask the right questions.

Perhaps most important, being able to make a business argument is not enough. CPOs need to have the courage to speak up, making their argument, and then fighting for their strategy. The situation described earlier of the CPO stepping up to manage the product teams and GTM teams to improve product launches is a perfect example of a leader stepping into an unexpected role to add value to the organization. If CPOs do not have the confidence to advocate for their ideas, they may allow others to browbeat them or fill the vacuum of influence left by their silence.

About the authors

Brad Warga (bwarga@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ San Francisco office and co-head of the global Human Resource Officers Practice.

Jennifer Wilson (jwilson@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Dallas office and co-head of the global Human Resources Officers Practice.

References

1 “CEO and board confidence monitor 2025: Persistent concerns, pockets of increased confidence,” Heidrick & Struggles, February 5, 2025, heidrick.com.

2 Emma Burrows, Sandra Pinnavaia, Sharon Sands, Brad Warga, Jennifer Wilson, and Darren Ashby, “Chief people officer of 2030: Building a tool kit to get from here to there,” Heidrick & Struggles, February 20, 2025, heidrick.com; and Brad Warga and Jennifer Wilson, “The next evolution of HR leadership: The connecting HR leader,” Heidrick & Struggles, September 19, 2024, heidrick.com.

Related Services & Industries

Chief Executive Acceleration

Human Resources Officers

Leadership Development

Organization & Culture

Performance Culture

Related Content

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

Executive Assessment

Leadership assurance: Elevating learning and development as a strategic driver of workforce planning

Learn how HR leaders can link learning and development to board priorities to strengthen succession, retain key talent, and build future-ready capabilities.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings