Future-ready private equity leadership in Japan: Four considerations | Perspectives | Heidrick & Struggles

Future-ready private equity leadership in Japan: Four considerations

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Private Equity Future-ready private equity leadership in Japan: Four considerations

PE firms that hire for potential as much as track record; seek communication, interpersonal, and cultural competencies; consider structural, sequenced leadership solutions; and prioritize a high-performing C-suite will be best positioned for success.

Aya Iinuma

August 15, 2025
5m to read

Private equity is growing at an accelerated pace in Japan, and while there is ample opportunity for value creation, seizing on these opportunities will require firms to have the right leaders in place to manage both investment and operations. PE firms and their portfolio businesses must attract, hire, develop, and retain well-qualified, future-looking executives to maximize returns for all stakeholders.

Indeed, PE firms that hire for potential as much as track record; seek communication, interpersonal, and cultural skills; consider structural, sequenced leadership solutions; and prioritize establishing a high-performing C-suite—especially by securing a strong CHRO—will be best positioned for success.

Private equity in Japan: A growing, evolving market

Japan’s PE sector began in earnest about 20 years ago, with little fanfare. For years afterward, companies across sectors were largely reluctant to seek or accept PE funding, due to its newness, and the industry grew at only a modest pace.

That has changed dramatically in the past few years, as Japanese businesses now see PE buyout or investment as much more favorable, and such transactions as well-established components of the country’s economic infrastructure. Thus stakeholders on all sides—PE firms, target companies (including well-established ones), bankers, advisory and consulting firms, and others—are eager to explore collaborative opportunities for acquisition, growth, and exit.

Indeed, all indicators suggest PE is exploding in Japan. Well-known players including Bain Capital, KKR, and Carlyle are growing their Japan-focused funds and teams, as others like Warburg Pincus and Hillhouse enter or return to this market. Domestic players, too, are rising, including Integral and J-GIA.

This trend has meant a large jump in PE transaction volume, with PE representing about 30% of all M&A transactions1 in the country in 2024, with total deal value over JPY 3 trillion2—the fourth consecutive year the transaction total went over that milestone figure. Meanwhile, the total value of PE and VC investment in Japan increased 40% from 2023 to 2024,3 representing over 15% of all such investment in the Asia-Pacific region (up from 10.6% in 2023).

Fundraising is growing as well, as much of the global focus shifts from China to Japan, which has an expanding, attractive PE footprint as noted earlier. As signs of this trend, investor allocations for Japan are larger than in previous funds, and several firms including Apollo and Ares have relocated from Hong Kong to Tokyo. Effective fundraising requires a strong on-the-ground presence, and nearly 100% of the fundraising executives we know in this space are Japanese natives.

The fast acceleration of PE activity and maturity in Japan means rising opportunity for all stakeholders, but also mounting competition for talent, whether investment executives or leaders of portfolio businesses, carve-outs, or other operations. Taking a proactive, strategic approach to talent is paramount.

Take a strategic approach to PE talent

We are seeing a tight market for well-qualified PE executives in Japan. Top-tier investment executives who have track records identifying promising targets, closing high-value deals, and winning business for PE sponsors are understandably in high demand, as are those who can step into CEO, CFO, CHRO and other senior manager roles to drive value for portfolio businesses.

Firms can locate and evaluate the best possible talent with the following four considerations in mind:

Hire for potential as much as track record: While a leader’s experience and expertise matter, also seek candidates with a transformational mindset and ability to manage high complexity in growing organizations that may be resistant to change. Our work highlights the qualities of future-ready leaders—the ability to mobilize, execute, and transform with agility.4 By seeking these capabilities that underlie impact, you can hire not only for “what” leaders have done but “how” they’ve done it and will do it for your business.5
Seek communication, interpersonal, and cultural skills: In line with the point above, soft skills represented by a high EQ are also critical to creating PE value. In Japan’s multicultural business context, language is an especially valuable tool. Look for bilingual leaders with a proven ability to work across cultures and gain buy-in from wide-ranging stakeholders including investors, portfolio teams, advisors, and partner businesses.
Consider structural, sequenced leadership solutions: It’s not just about hiring high-potential leaders but also setting them up for success. For first-time portfolio-company CEOs, for example, it may make sense to appoint an executive chair or other experienced senior advisor and mentor to guide the new executive through their early tenure. In other situations, it may be of benefit not to hire a CEO immediately, instead controlling the portfolio business through a board and other C-team leaders, enabling the organizational structure and leadership group, including what’s needed in the top executive, to evolve over time to match business needs.
Don’t forget about the CHRO: The chief people officer is a critical hire and executive in any business, but especially a growing portfolio company—because they are the ones expected to drive cultural transformation and help recruit other top leaders. Finding capable CHROs can be challenging, but it’s well worth the effort, and again should target future-focused, agile executives.

PE represents large, rising opportunity in Japan. Firms that incorporate these four considerations into their business and talent strategy will be best prepared to maximize value creation for the long term.

About the authors

Sari Hattanda (shattanda@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ Tokyo office and a member of the Financial Services Practice.

Aya Iinuma (aiinuma@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick and Struggles’ Tokyo office and a member of the Financial Services Practice; she is focused on recruiting in the PE sector in Japan.

References

1 Sebastien Lamy, Azusa Owa, and Jim Verbeeten, “Competition to heat up as Japan takes private equity pole position in Asia Pacific,” Bain & Company, press release, May 31, 2024, bain.com.

2 Sebastien Lamy, Azusa Owa, and Jim Verbeeten, “Japan private equity off to a strong start in 2025, continues to be a hotspot for investors,” Bain & Company, June 5, 2024, bain.com.

3 Dylan Thomas, Neel Hiteshbhai Bharucha, and Yuzo Yamaguchi, “Private equity investment in Japan soars,” S&P Global, January 28, 2025, spglobal.com.

4TA Mitchell, Sharon Sands, and Naomi Record, “Developing future-ready leaders,” Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

5 For more on hiring for the “how” instead of the “what,” see Jason Henderson and Amanda Worthington, “The landscape for hiring a PE operating company CEO is changing fast—hire for ‘how’ to navigate it successfully,” Heidrick & Struggles, heidrick.com.

Related content

2024 Asia Pacific Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific region explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

Shadi El Farr
,
Ritu Khandelia
,
Stephen Zhang

Shadi El Farr, Ritu Khandelia, Stephen Zhang

Report

2024 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms around the world examines demographics, organizational structure, and compensation for these professionals.

Jeffrey S. Sanders
,
Stephen Schwanhausser

Jeffrey S. Sanders, Stephen Schwanhausser

Report

2024 Private Equity–Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Our third report on compensation trends for chief financial officers explores data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on both organizational structure and compensation for this increasingly critical role.

Susie Clements
,
Stephen Schwanhausser
,
Elizabeth P. Simpson
,
Sachi Vora

Susie Clements, Stephen Schwanhausser, Elizabeth P. Simpson, Sachi Vora

Article

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings