Supply-chain officer focus: The strategic value of succession planning | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Supply-chain officer focus: The strategic value of succession planning

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Supply Chain & Operations Officers Supply-chain officer focus: The strategic value of succession planning

Many organizations where the supply chain is crucial to operations have been elevating the strategic importance of their chief supply chain officers. But talent is scarce, and succession planning is taking on new urgency. Interviews with 30 supply chain leaders suggest three key elements of improvement.
September 11, 2025

Camilla Gilone ,
Fabrice Lebecq

Download the PDF

The chief supply chain officer (CSCO) role has undergone unprecedented transformation in recent years, particularly in sectors where supply chains are mission-critical—consumer goods, industrials, healthcare, and pharmaceuticals, for example. The role, which is also frequently referred to as chief operating officer (COO), is growing in scope and complexity, and in many companies is becoming more of a driving force behind strategic imperatives.

This transformation is unsurprising, given today’s operational context. The Covid-19 pandemic exposed vulnerabilities in supply chains, demanding an extensive overhaul in the remit of CSCOs. Ongoing geopolitical tensions and economic volatility—including the effects of recent US tariff changes—have prompted companies to continue optimizing their operations to increase agility and resiliency, unlocking value while attempting to keep costs down. But with increased environmental regulations and a constant shift toward more localized supply chains, disruption and uncertainty will only continue. Many organizations have initiated large-scale transformation processes as a result.

To navigate this complex supply chain environment, companies are making changes in the leadership of their supply chain functions. Our analysis of more than 360 CSCO roles across the world in terms of tenure, diversity, and prior experience shows that 36% of the world’s largest publicly listed companies have appointed new CSCOs since January 2023.1 Furthermore, CSCOs spend on average 4.2 years in the role. And, while the shifting priorities of CSCOs are well-documented, less has been said about the critical importance of succession planning for these roles, despite the rate and pace of turnover.

The elevated strategic nature of the role is also demanding a more rigorous approach to succession planning and talent development than ever before. But organizations face a challenge: traditionally, supply chain and operations functions were not always the most attractive career paths for young leaders. High responsibility, limited visibility, and structural ambiguity have deterred many high-potential candidates, and the role’s new breadth and enterprise influence have not yet changed the situation. When coupled with the relatively short tenures of these leaders, the lack of a pipeline dedicated to developing CSCOs’ capabilities could become a significant threat to companies’ ability to maintain a competitive edge and create long-term value.

To understand the critical leadership characteristics that will define success for the next generation of supply chain leaders in this context, we interviewed 30 supply chain leaders around the world. Their insights, and our ongoing work with CSCOs, also suggest how companies can future-proof their organizations by rethinking succession planning for this function.

To learn more about the strategic value of succession planning for chief supply chain officers, download the PDF.

About the authors

Camilla Gilone (cgilone@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ London office and a member of the global Supply Chain & Operations Officers Practice.

Fabrice Lebecq (flebecq@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Brussels office and global head of the Supply Chain & Operations Officers Practice.

Reference

1 This and all following data from Heidrick & Struggles proprietary analysis of chief supply chain officers from companies in the Fortune 1000, Fortune Europe 500, and APAC 150, 2023–2025 (YTD).

Related Services & Industries

Consumer Products

Energy

Healthcare & Life Sciences

Industrial

Industrial Goods & Technology

Leadership Development

Process Industries

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Technology

Related Content

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain, 3M

Heidrick & Struggles’ Alasdair Spink speaks with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain at 3M, on the key skills and leadership capabilities chief supply chain officers need to become future-ready.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Managing the semiconductor trilemma: A conversation with Dr. Roawen Chen, chief supply chain and operations officer at Qualcomm

Dr. Roawen Chen shares the leadership capabilities critical to managing the three competing KPIs of the semiconductor industry: pursuing the most advanced technology, having the lowest cost, and having unlimited supply.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

How AI is delivering value in an integrated supply chain: A conversation with James Borzi, EVP and chief supply chain officer at Baxter International

James Borzi shares how he sees AI continuing to optimize the healthcare supply chain; and what it means to him as a leader to lead in an AI-enabled world.

AutoMobility

Driving efficiency: How Europe’s automotive CFOs are rising to new operational challenges

Europe’s automotive CFOs are evolving into enterprise leaders, driving innovation, efficiency, and sustainability amid rising operational and regulatory challenges.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings