New leadership needs in biopharma: The connecting leader | Perspectives | Heidrick & Struggles

New leadership needs in biopharma: The connecting leader

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Biopharmaceuticals New leadership needs in biopharma: The connecting leader

As open innovation transforms the sector, biopharma companies need leaders who can enable effective collaboration, knowledge-sharing, and the integration of external and internal resources.

Dr. Marion Fengler-Veith ,
Jennifer Streitwieser

June 19, 2025
9m to read

In the biopharmaceutical industry, Open Innovation (OI) is a transformative approach to research and development that has emerged as a critical enabler of progress. It is an approach that emphasizes collaboration, knowledge-sharing, and the integration of external and internal resources to drive innovation.

A variety of OI models have been introduced across the sector, including external partnerships and alliances, innovation hubs, open innovation challenges, start-up accelerators and ventures, and technology licensing and IP exchange deals.

In this new environment, we have seen that a few companies have reached a level of significant scientific co-creation by seamlessly connecting internal research and development with the external environment.

This does not happen by accident; organizations that are successful with this approach are intentional about identifying and developing the required capabilities for talent. However, in many organizations, specific scientific expertise and credentials are key factors for promoting individuals into senior leadership roles, and little emphasis is placed on key leadership abilities that will ensure long-term success as OI continues to transform the sector.

Looking forward, the sector will need more leaders with not only scientific expertise but also leadership capabilities to deliver on an agenda that is bigger than any one of them or any single organization.

Our work has found that leadership capabilities focused on person-to-person connection—within, outside, and across their organization’s ecosystem even as it changes—can enable this kind of success.1 Heidrick & Struggles refers to these leaders as “connecting leaders.” These are people who can deliver on five imperatives:

Envision the future, deliver today
Act with purpose and courage
Harness the power of others
Orchestrate ecosystems
Cultivate a learning mindset

Envision the future, deliver today

As OI creates new opportunities for collaboration, envisioning the future is more complicated and more important than in the past because successful collaboration requires alignment on a clear vision. While biopharma leaders often understand the importance of creating the future vision, we have seen that they can become overwhelmed with day-to-day leadership responsibilities and problem solving.

It has long been true that if a leader is not able to deliver today, they will not have the permission to build future capabilities and offerings—and yet, if they neglect to look ahead, other organizations in this fast-moving and innovative industry will overtake them. Therefore, leaders must be able to hold both the short- and long-term perspectives simultaneously.

Five characteristics differentiate leaders who can envision the future while delivering today:

Strategic and forward-looking: Envisioning and planning multiple futures, developing flexible strategies, and making choices to profit from uncertainty and turbulence in the market
Digital and AI savvy: Becoming digitally attuned enough to ask the right questions, stay ahead of emerging technologies such as AI, and adapt (personally and organizationally) at the speed of digital transformation
Transformational: Thinking and building for exponential growth and anticipating the impact of change on employees and customers, while remaining laser-focused on organizational purpose
Simplicity-focused: Distinguishing between necessary and needless complexity and becoming ruthless about reducing or even eliminating organizational clutter
Decisive and data-focused: Ensuring a foundation of financial excellence, business acumen, and real-time analytics to support making decisions and trade-offs at pace

Act with purpose and courage

Despite biopharma’s innovative nature, courage can be difficult for leaders in such a highly regulated industry. The stakes are high, as many leaders know—we hear often that their drive to address patients’ unmet medical needs is what led people to biopharma. We believe that connecting purpose and courage can enable leaders to act boldly while still maintaining ethical and careful leadership.

Personal purpose can become a compass that allows leaders to navigate through a crisis, make courageous decisions, take risks, and stay resilient, all while remaining focused on the innovation that will lead to breakthroughs in patient care and treatment.

Five characteristics help leaders act with purpose and courage. Leaders should be:

Self-aware: Understanding their own personal drivers, motivations, and biases; able to objectively evaluate personal emotions, strengths, weaknesses; and aware of the perception of others
Purpose-driven: Being strongly grounded in a sense of purpose, aligning personal and organizational goals with a socially meaningful purpose
Inspirational: Energizing others with a vision for the future that helps them ascribe greater meaning to their roles, resulting in heightened engagement and focus
Courageous: Willing to make tough decisions in an uncertain environment, even when actions may have unpredictable outcomes, and ready to take risks and learn from failures
Resilient: Adapting to and overcoming adversity in the face of turbulences, recovering quickly from difficult situations

Harness the power of others

Because OI emphasizes collaboration, knowledge sharing, and the integration of external and internal resources to drive innovation, the ability to harness the power of others as a leader has never been more critical.

To solve today’s problems at pace, especially in an industry with both regional hubs and global networks, leaders must draw on a wide range of people with diverse skill sets, perspectives, and backgrounds. They must develop a truly global mindset to drive collaboration and leadership across the boundaries of stakeholder considerations, partnerships, and ecosystems.

Five characteristics help leaders harness the power of others. Leaders should be:

Human-centered: Connecting deeply with the human beings surrounding the organization—customers, employees, partners, or stakeholders—listening to, caring for, and empathizing with them
Inclusive: Seeking different opinions, backgrounds, experiences, and capabilities to inform decision making, creating a psychologically safe space, and embracing differences and diversity of thought as second nature
Empowering: Creating space for others to experiment, test, and learn in order to build self-confidence, develop individual capabilities, and drive innovation
Collaborative: Creating an environment where everyone shares information and capabilities to engage the right people to solve problems, building trust and consensus
Talent-focused: Attracting the best talent and focusing on development, building a culture of development, creating opportunities, and challenging for growth

Orchestrate ecosystems

In addition to the ability to harness the power of others, the ability to manage and build robust ecosystems has long been necessary to competitive strategy. But today, as OI advances and as many forces—such as geopolitical volatility and technological advances—are blurring the boundaries of the enterprise, biopharma leaders are required to build lasting ecosystems to address more complex challenges.

Five key characteristics help leaders orchestrate ecosystems. Leaders should be:

Customer-centric: Deeply understanding of the customer segments, looking at products and services through the lens of the customer to improve overall customer experience and understand how their interests are evolving
Externally networked: Connecting and building relationships with leaders of organizations with complementary capabilities, whether the company is currently working with them or not
Invested in external innovation: Driving innovation through teaming within and across organizations, as well as across industries
Committed to solving the big problems, such as sustainability: Adapting business practices that consider social and environmental impact, only partnering with ecosystem actors who embrace responsible business practices
Culturally adept: Navigating diverse cultures seamlessly, balancing global and local capabilities, understanding differences among global and local customers, regulators, and suppliers

Cultivating a learning mindset

Innovation requires both curiosity and know-how and, generally, leaders in biopharma come with a natural curiosity and learning agility. However, it is important for them to extend their curiosity beyond incremental scientific developments to more holistic future possibilities in order to solve broader enterprise challenges, particularly in this OI environment.

A learning mindset underpins the four preceding leadership imperatives. Whoever learns the fastest has a major competitive advantage, and those who are willing to learn, who are open to embracing change, will be best able to maximize their agility and adaptability.

There are three characteristics that help leaders develop a learning mindset. Leaders should be:

Curious: Seeking new ideas, having an open mind, challenging the status quo, actively listening to others
Agile: Spotting opportunities and threats and then adapting and pivoting at a faster pace than competitors to create a competitive advantage
Entrepreneurial: Willing to take risks in an uncertain environment, being resourceful, creative, and solution-oriented

Conclusion

We have seen that adopting and applying OI in biopharma requires profound changes within the organization and in talent and leadership profiles. The next generation of leaders needs to be agile and able to work effectively across functions and departments in service of driving innovation.

Biopharma organizations must break down silos and encourage openness, transparency, and communication. Success hinges not only on partnerships and technology but also on culture and the people leading and working within these frameworks. Leaders must be able to connect with people and teams and connect them with each other, managing internal and external partnerships all while fostering trust, providing strategic purpose and vision, and balancing competition with collaboration.

Leaders who are able to envision the future while delivering today; act with purpose and courage; harness the power of others; orchestrate ecosystems; and cultivate a learning mindset will be best positioned to lead their organizations into the future.

About the authors

Alessandro Buccella (abuccella@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Zurich office and leads Heidrick Consulting's global Healthcare & Life Sciences Practice.

Dr. Marion Fengler-Veith (mfenglerveith@heidrick.com) is the partner in charge of the Zurich office and a member of the Healthcare & Life Sciences and Supply Chain & Operations Officers practices.

Jennifer Streitwieser (jstreitwieser@heidrick.com) is a partner in the Philadelphia office and a member of Heidrick Consulting.

Reference

1 Dr. Regis Chasse and TA Mitchell, “The connecting leader: Five imperatives for leaders today,” Heidrick & Struggles, September 25, 2024.

Related content

Leadership and disruptive innovation in biotech and mental health care: A conversation with Kabir Nath, CEO of Compass Pathways

Charles Moore

Charles Moore

Podcast

From scientist to founder: NMD Pharma CEO Thomas Holm Pedersen discusses leadership, innovation, and the future of biotech

Martin Holm

Martin Holm

Podcast

Disruption and innovation in the biopharmaceutical industry: An interview with GSK’s chief commercial officer Luke Miels

Charles Moore

Charles Moore

Podcast

Carsten Brunn on moving from big pharma to biotech: Risk, rewards, and leadership styles

Charles Moore

Charles Moore

Podcast

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings