Government and corporate affairs focus: Finding leaders who can effectively manage political and regulatory risk | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Government and corporate affairs focus: Finding leaders who can effectively manage political and regulatory risk

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Legal Officers Government and corporate affairs focus: Finding leaders who can effectively manage political and regulatory risk

Navigating the constantly evolving global political and geopolitical landscape is a strategic necessity today. Our work with US and global companies suggests a comprehensive menu of options and some questions companies can use to navigate them, whether they are just starting out or already have a foundation to build on.
June 23, 2025

Julian Ha

Having executives who can manage political and regulatory risks and opportunities effectively is critical today, both in the United States and globally. National-level politics and social issues have always had some influence on corporations’ performance and growth, but in today’s environment, regulation can quickly make or break a business model. Even discussions about regulatory change can spur companies to take fast action to avoid new challenges or position themselves for new opportunities. And, of course, governments around the world will continue to award huge contracts to some private sector companies and not others.

This intensification of political and regulatory risks comes against the backdrop of an already challenging environment in terms of business performance and safeguarding corporate reputation. In recent years, people in countries around the world have been expecting corporations to take on more responsibility for addressing societal issues.1 Even before the current unpredictability, economic and geopolitical volatility had become persistent. A recent survey of CEOs and directors around the world found that geopolitical uncertainty was the second-most cited issue facing organizations this year, and the one they were least often confident their organization could manage.2

As a result, government and corporate affairs are no longer simply about lobbying. The types of skills that companies need—and the types of strategies that they employ—to mitigate political and regulatory risks and seize opportunities have evolved substantially.

These shifts are driving substantial change in the types of leaders companies need to manage political and regulatory risks and how those leaders fit into the overall organization. Many national and multi-national companies have long had government affairs functions and have developed the sophisticated architecture of internal and external resources needed to effectively manage today’s risks. Highly regulated companies led this trend, not surprisingly, starting in the 1970s. But in many other companies, particularly those feeling less regulatory pressure, addressing government affairs and regulatory issues was not an everyday need. Broadly speaking, these companies followed one of two paths: creating a small government affairs function or relying on a mix of communications and legal executives, as well as external consultants and trade associations.3 Many of these companies are now finding that these approaches are no longer sufficient. For these companies, it can be challenging to know exactly which leaders and resources they now need. Based on our long experience working with executives managing these issues, we will lay out the key elements that organizations will likely need to combine to create an effective approach to managing political and regulatory risk today. We also provide guidance to help companies at the start of this journey understand their initial talent needs.

Options for organizational models

Traditionally, government affairs was synonymous with lobbying. Effective lobbyists used their relationships to gather important information about policy changes or political developments, and also influenced policy decisions directly by making a case for their industry or their company. Most companies did not need access to these skills full-time, and would hire lobbyists as and when a relevant issue arose. Meanwhile, companies generally managed communications internally, only calling on consultants for crises or other exceptional situations.

In today’s world, that model is no longer sufficient. Understanding and managing public policy risk requires broader strategies that bring in other partners, use political-style issue campaigns, and draw on sophisticated targeting techniques to reach relevant policymakers at all levels of government. Doing this effectively will generally require both more in-house talent and greater enterprise-wide coordination. No single individual is likely to offer the full range of capabilities and experiences needed—or to offer the level of capacity required. Instead, companies can consider a range of options to use in combination to find the right approach for their organization. These different options are not necessarily straightforward substitutes for one another. Instead, each position has a distinct role, structure, and focus, and—as a result—its own advantages and disadvantages.

For the full breakdown of these advantages and disadvantages, see page 3 of the PDF.

The precise configuration of these positions will vary significantly across organizations. One multinational investment bank, for example, has a head of corporate affairs, who reports directly to the CEO and manages several teams, including a government affairs team and a communications team. These teams may each contain around 20 people globally. At the same time, the investment bank has a number of high-profile senior advisors—including a former senior US Treasury official—and employs several different firms of specialist lobbyists and consultants. The bank is also a member of at least four trade associations, which together cover the full range of financial services issues. In general, the broader the business, the broader the issue sets it faces and the broader range of consultants and industry groups it requires to cover them all.

Getting started

Many companies may be beginning the process of building their political and regulatory risk strategy and team from scratch. The right starting point will vary by industry, geography, and company-specific context, but will likely involve a combination of the options above. It may be, for example, that a carefully chosen external resource and a senior advisor with extensive industry-specific knowledge and connections could fulfill the immediate need. Starting with a small, in-house team can also help the organization build momentum by demonstrating the value of investing in leaders in this area.

The following questions may help CEOs and board members to get a sense of the precise mixture of skills and roles they need:

What problem or potential problem are you trying to solve?
Which of the following inputs or results are you looking for?
Have more information/insights about what may be coming
Increase awareness of your company among policymakers
Influence/change regulation or legislation
Obtain/retain government funding/contracts
Bring political/government experience to the C-suite
Bring political/government experience to the boardroom

What skill gaps do you have today? Do you need one-time or temporary expertise or ongoing leadership?
What kind of resources are you willing to commit to this? And how will these resources be managed and overseen within the company? How much time, for example, is the existing executive team willing to commit to both managing and executing these efforts?

Conclusion

Roles related to political and regulatory risk have not been a top priority as CEOs and boards have shaped, and reshaped, their executive teams in recent years,4 but this is starting to change. While companies have always had to consider, and work with, governments, they now need to do so more often—and in more complex—ways. To be effective, companies need both additional skills and enhanced firepower. The framework of options laid out here can be a useful guide, both for companies just getting started and for those with some resources already in place. In all cases, companies should base their talent and leadership decisions on a detailed understanding of the potential strategic impact of political and regulatory actions, their desired outcomes, and the level of resources they are prepared to commit.

About the author

Julian Ha (jha@heidrick.com) is the global managing partner of the Government & Corporate Affairs Practice and co-founder of the Association Sector practice; he is based in the Washington, DC office.

References

12025 Edelman Trust Barometer: Trust and the Crisis of Grievance, Edelman; and Jeremy Hanson and Tim Gallagher, “CEO and board succession in the age of impact | An evolving model: Trends and recommendations,” Heidrick & Struggles.

2 These have been the top two concerns of CEOs and board members around the world we have surveyed for the past two years. For more, see “CEO and board confidence monitor 2025: Persistent concerns, pockets of increased confidence,” Heidrick & Struggles, February 5, 2025.

3 For more on how trade associations are evolving in this context, see Tonya Muse and Teraesa Vinson, “CEO succession focus: Succeeding as a first-time association CEO,” Heidrick & Struggles, May 29, 2025; and Ellen Maag, Tonya Muse, William O’Leary, “CEO succession: How industry and professional associations are strengthening their leadership planning,” Heidrick & Struggles, June 20, 2024.

4 Alyse D. Bodine and Victoria S. Reese, “The evolution of Fortune 100 leadership teams, 2020 to 2022,” Heidrick & Struggles.

Related Services & Industries

Audit, Risk, Compliance & Controls

Corporate Affairs

Government Affairs

Leadership Development

Legal Officers

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Related Content

Leadership Development

Government and corporate affairs focus: Four non-negotiable attributes for government affairs leaders

Amid unprecedented political change, government affairs leaders stress the need for the right people in the right roles and pose key questions for CEOs and boards.

Social Impact

Building trust in AI systems and AI systems that deserve our trust: A conversation with Miriam Vogel, president and CEO of EqualAI

Legal professionals face unique challenges in implementing AI while maintaining compliance and ethical standards.Miriam Vogel shares what it means to her to lead in an AI-enabled world and how she believes that legal leaders  must balance guardrails and innovation to remain competitive. This conversation explores how executives can build and use AI tools that earn and deserve trust in the legal sector.

Legal Officers

How functional leaders are using AI—and barriers to progress

Usage of AI is growing across functions—but most leaders want to move even faster.

Legal Officers

How legal leaders are using AI today

Our second annual survey of legal professionals in the legal function shows that legal leaders are slightly more cautious about AI than their peers in other functions across the C-suite. The research examines how corporate legal departments are implementing AI technologies while maintaining regulatory compliance and business acumen. These findings provide critical insights for the legal industry and executive search professionals seeking qualified candidates with emerging technology expertise.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings