How finance leaders are using AI today | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

How finance leaders are using AI today

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Financial Officers How finance leaders are using AI today

Our second annual survey of leaders in finance about their use of AI shows that double the share of last year are using it for internal tasks and that they have increased usage across the function.
April 08, 2025

Heidrick & Struggles

Read the infographic

Separate surveys explored the perspectives of leaders across functions. Infographics for each of the following can be found here:

Chief legal officers
Chief marketing officers
Chief people officers
Chief sales officers
Chief strategy officers
Chief supply chain and operating officers

Our second annual survey of leaders in finance about their use of AI shows that double the share of last year are using it for internal tasks and that they have increased usage across the function; looking ahead, finance leaders expect the biggest increases in the use of AI to be in FP&A, budgeting, and accounting and reporting. And they, like their C-suite peers, are still seeking AI talent with a wide range of tactics, but most often internal development.

Executives across functions indicate that AI is rapidly becoming a part of daily business and is being measured for its contributions like any other investment.

Across functions, it’s still hard for companies to find the AI talent they need. As leaders seek to use AI for a broadening range of tasks and projects—eventually rewiring business processes across the enterprise—we expect high demand for AI-specific expertise at all levels to continue for three to six years.

In the long run, it seems likely demand will follow a pattern similar to that in earlier waves of computing innovation, from personal computing to cloud, in which specific technical expertise was in high demand during the transition, but then declined as the relevant knowledge became a part of every person’s role. In other words, we expect that basic working knowledge of AI will be as fundamental an expectation for senior leaders as being digitally savvy is today.

Related Services & Industries

Financial Officers

Related Content

Financial Officers

Finance function focus: How chief tax officers are rewriting the role of tax

The modern chief tax officer is part strategist, part operator, and part talent builder—rewriting the tax function for a more complex, capital-conscious era.

Financial Officers

Crypto and digital assets focus: Finding the right leaders for a maturing sector

Crypto is a high-stakes market, and competition for capital, customers, and talent is brutal. Crypto companies should look for four crucial capabilities in their leaders.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Financial Officers

Driving organizational transformation in family-owned businesses: A conversation with Björn Lahm, CFO of Harting Technology Group

Björn Lahm shares how he maintains culture and aligns goals with values within a family-owned business.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings