How strategy leaders are using AI today | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

How strategy leaders are using AI today

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Strategy Leaders How strategy leaders are using AI today

Our survey of strategy leaders about their use of AI shows that nearly 20% say their companies are not yet using AI—and nearly 60% think that their companies are adopting AI too slowly.
April 08, 2025

Heidricks & Struggles

Read the infographic

Separate surveys explored the perspectives of leaders across functions. Infographics for each of the following can be found here:

Chief financial officers
Chief legal officers
Chief marketing officers
Chief people officers
Chief sales officers
Chief supply chain and operating officers

Our survey of strategy leaders about their use of AI shows that nearly 20% say their companies are not yet using AI—and nearly 60% think that their companies are adopting AI too slowly.

Executives across functions indicate that AI is rapidly becoming a part of daily business and is being measured for its contributions like any other investment.

Across functions, it’s still hard for companies to find the AI talent they need. As leaders seek to use AI for a broadening range of tasks and projects—eventually rewiring business processes across the enterprise—we expect high demand for AI-specific expertise at all levels to continue for three to six years.

In the long run, it seems likely demand will follow a pattern similar to that in earlier waves of computing innovation, from personal computing to cloud, in which specific technical expertise was in high demand during the transition, but then declined as the relevant knowledge became a part of every person’s role. In other words, we expect that basic working knowledge of AI will be as fundamental an expectation for senior leaders as being digitally savvy is today.

Related Services & Industries

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Strategy Leaders

Related Content

Legal Officers

How functional leaders are using AI—and barriers to progress

Usage of AI is growing across functions—but most leaders want to move even faster.

Digital Infrastructure

Adapting to rapid advancement in telecommunications technology: A conversation with José Perdomo Lorenzo, chief strategy officer of Deutsche Telekom Group

José Perdomo Lorenzo, chief strategy officer of Deutsche Telekom Group, shares his strategic perspective on ESG, AI, and leadership in the telecommunications sector.

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings