How functional leaders are using AI—and barriers to progress | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

How functional leaders are using AI—and barriers to progress

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Legal Officers How functional leaders are using AI—and barriers to progress

Usage of AI is growing across functions—but most leaders want to move even faster.
April 08, 2025

Heidrick & Struggles

Read the infographic

Separate surveys explored the perspectives of leaders across functions. Infographics for each of the following can be found here:

Chief financial officers
Chief legal officers
Chief marketing officers
Chief people officers
Chief sales officers
Chief strategy officers
Chief supply chain and operating officers

A recent survey of nearly 2,000 leaders in five key functions—finance; human resources; legal and compliance; marketing, sales, and strategy; and supply chain and operations—shows that they are, on the whole, aligned on priorities for AI use and the challenges it presents. This suggests that leadership teams are pulling together to address a technology moving with unprecedented speed.

Executives indicate that AI is rapidly becoming a part of daily business and is being measured for its contributions like any other investment.

Across functions, it’s still hard for companies to find the AI talent they need. As leaders seek to use AI for a broadening range of tasks and projects—eventually rewiring business processes across the enterprise—we expect high demand for AI-specific expertise at all levels to continue for three to six years.

In the long run, it seems likely demand will follow a pattern similar to that in earlier waves of computing innovation, from personal computing to cloud, in which specific technical expertise was in high demand during the transition, but then declined as the relevant knowledge became a part of every person’s role. In other words, we expect that basic working knowledge of AI will be as fundamental an expectation for senior leaders as being digitally savvy is today.

That said, we also expect every enterprise will have a senior leader responsible for the AI strategy and for AI platforms and tools.

Related Services & Industries

Financial Officers

Human Resources Officers

Legal Officers

Marketing Leaders

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Sales Leaders

Strategy Leaders

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Related Content

Leadership Development

Government and corporate affairs focus: Four non-negotiable attributes for government affairs leaders

Amid unprecedented political change, government affairs leaders stress the need for the right people in the right roles and pose key questions for CEOs and boards.

Legal Officers

Government and corporate affairs focus: Finding leaders who can effectively manage political and regulatory risk

Navigating the constantly evolving global political and geopolitical landscape is a strategic necessity today. Our work with US and global companies suggests a comprehensive menu of options and some questions companies can use to navigate them, whether they are just starting out or already have a foundation to build on.

Social Impact

Building trust in AI systems and AI systems that deserve our trust: A conversation with Miriam Vogel, president and CEO of EqualAI

Legal professionals face unique challenges in implementing AI while maintaining compliance and ethical standards.Miriam Vogel shares what it means to her to lead in an AI-enabled world and how she believes that legal leaders  must balance guardrails and innovation to remain competitive. This conversation explores how executives can build and use AI tools that earn and deserve trust in the legal sector.

Legal Officers

How legal leaders are using AI today

Our second annual survey of legal professionals in the legal function shows that legal leaders are slightly more cautious about AI than their peers in other functions across the C-suite. The research examines how corporate legal departments are implementing AI technologies while maintaining regulatory compliance and business acumen. These findings provide critical insights for the legal industry and executive search professionals seeking qualified candidates with emerging technology expertise.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings