Trends Among Top CEO's | Executive Search Industry Trends 2025

Identified Country:

Route to the Top 2025: Explore global CEO backgrounds and trends

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Chief Executive Officer Route to the Top 2025: Explore global CEO backgrounds and trends

This interactive dashboard includes data on sitting CEOs at the largest companies in 27 markets around the world, along with data on new appointments and trends.
April 23, 2025

Heidrick & Struggles

About the research

This year’s Route to the Top draws on an analysis of the profiles of the 1,232 CEOs at the largest companies in 27 markets. The data reflects the CEOs as of February 1, 2025. The date of analysis was March 1, 2025.

Australia and New Zealand (ASX 100 & NZSX 10), Belgium (BEL 20), Brazil (BOVESPA), Canada (TSX 60), Colombia (COLCAP), Denmark (OMX Copenhagen 25), Finland (OMX Helsinki 25), France (CAC 40), Germany (DAX & MDAX), Hong Kong (Hang Seng), Ireland (ISEQ Overall), Italy (FTSE MIB), Kenya (NSE Top 40), Mexico (BMV), the Netherlands (AEX), Norway (OBX), Poland (WIG 20), Portugal (PSI 20), Saudi Arabia (Tadawul), Singapore (STI 30), South Africa (JSE Top 40), Spain (IBEX 35), Sweden (OMX Stockholm 30), Switzerland (SMI Expanded), the United Arab Emirates (ADX & DFM), the United Kingdom (FTSE 100), and the United States (Fortune 100) are included in this report.

Fifty-seven percent of CEOs and board members have relatively little confidence that their CEO succession planning process is positioning their organization well for the future, according to a recent Heidrick & Struggles survey.1

The good news is that many boards—and particularly those at companies traded on public markets—are increasing their investment in CEO succession planning. Through our work, we have identified a few steps leading boards are taking to improve their succession planning for themselves and for CEOs, including making planning a continuous, transparent process linked to long-term strategy. (For more, see “CEO and board confidence monitor: Beating the succession planning paradox.”)

We know that boards are increasingly seeking CEOs with capabilities such as having a learning mindset, humility, and being able to lead across boundaries that divide people. (For more, see “Route to the Top | Today’s CEO: The growing importance of character, learning, and leading in a contested world.”)

We also know that those capabilities can be found in leaders with all kinds of backgrounds: Our Route to the Top research has over the past seven years explored trends in CEO appointees at public companies in the largest markets around the world—their prior functional experience, age, tenure, race or ethnicity, gender, and education, whether they are promoted from within their organization or hires from the outside, and more.

This year, a few notable data points stand out:

Globally, the share of CEOs with advanced degrees has increased, from 58% in 2019 to 65% in 2025.
We see some of the highest shares on diversity measures in Asia Pacific markets. Singapore and Australia/New Zealand have the highest share of women CEOs, at 17% and 16%, respectively.
The United States and Canada have the highest share of CEOs with previous COO experience, at 42% each.
We found that North American CEOs are the oldest, both at appointment and currently. This region has the lowest share of CEOs appointed before age 45, as well as those with longer average tenures.
Europe has the highest share of CEOs with cross-border and cross-sector experience, while North America has the lowest.

We have compiled key data from each market into the interactive experience below, where you can view aggregated data by market and year across a range of measures, including education, appointment type, and prior C-suite experience.

Market data: Timelines
New appointments, by market
Trends

1 “CEO and board confidence monitor: A worried start to 2024,” Heidrick & Struggles, January 17, 2024

Market data

Our market data on timelines includes the total number of sitting CEOs in each market, CEOs’ age at appointment, CEOs’ current age, the share of CEOs under age 45, the average number of years it took for CEOs to be appointed from the time they joined the company, and their average tenure in the role.

Use the drop-down menu located under the chart legend to navigate the data points.

Our diversity charts include data on the share of women in the CEO role by market, the share of CEOs who are of a different nationality than the market where their company is listed, the share of CEOs with experience physically working in a different geography than the market where they currently are CEO, and the share of CEOs with experience working in a different sector than the company where they currently are CEO.

Use the drop-down menu located under the chart legend to navigate the data points.

Our education chart shows the share of CEOs in each market with advanced degrees, bachelor’s degrees or the equivalent, and no degree.

Following is a chart that shows the share of CEOs in each market with an MBA.

Our appointment type chart shows the share of CEOs in each market who were appointed into the CEO role from another company, those who were promoted to the CEO role internally, and those who were a founder of the company of which they are CEO.

Our C-suite experience chart shows the share of CEOs who have prior C-suite experience, as well as the shares of each who have CEO, CFO, COO, and other C-suite experience.

Use the drop-down menu located under the chart legend to navigate the data points.

New appointments: by market

Our new appointments chart shows the share of CEOs newly appointed in each market, by the half year. These are shown globally as well as by region.

Use the drop-down menu located under the chart legend to navigate the data points.

Trend data

These charts compare the year-over-year information of all the CEOs included in our study.

Please note that the number of markets included in our report has increased over the years. In 2019, 16 markets were included; in 2020, 20 markets were included; in 2021, 24 markets were included; in 2022, 25 markets were included. Since 2023, there have been 27 markets included in our study.

Our trend data on timelines includes global trend data from 2019 to 2024 on CEOs’ age at appointment, CEOs’ current age, the share of CEOs under age 45, the average number of years it took for CEOs to be appointed from the time they joined the company, and their average tenure in the role.

Use the drop-down menu located under the chart legend to navigate the data points.

Our diversity charts includes global trend data from 2019 to 2024 on the share of women in the CEO role, the share of CEOs who are of a different nationality than the market where their company is listed, the share of CEOs with experience physically working in a different geography than the market where they currently are CEO, and the share of CEOs with experience working in a different sector than the company where they currently are CEO.

Use the drop-down menu located under the chart legend to navigate the data points.

Our education chart includes global trend data from 2019 to 2024 on the share of CEOs with advanced degrees, bachelor’s degrees or the equivalent, and no degree.

Following is a chart that shows the share of CEOs in each market with an MBA.

Our appointment type chart includes global trend data from 2019 to 2024 on the share of CEOs who were appointed into the CEO role from another company, those who were promoted to the CEO role internally, and those who were a founder of the company of which they are CEO.

Our C-suite experience chart includes global trend data from 2019 to 2024 on the share of CEOs who have prior C-suite experience, as well as the shares of each who have CEO, CFO, COO, and other C-suite experience.

Use the drop-down menu located under the chart legend to navigate the data points.

Related Services & Industries

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Leadership Development

How AI is reshaping legal services: A conversation with Julien Tanguy, CEO of Lefebvre Group

Julien Tanguy, CEO of a leading European provider of legal and tax services, shares how AI is driving cultural change, redefining leadership roles, and accelerating innovation through trusted data, talent, and technology.

Marketing, Strategy & Communications

Communications as a key driver to growth: A conversation with Silvio Tavares, president and CEO of VantageScore

Silvio Tavares discusses leveraging accountability, AI, and clear company values to drive performance and innovation.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top US 2026 | Closing the CEO capability gap

Fortune 500 companies are increasingly appointing new CEOs who have prior experience in the role. However, a new survey finds that more than a third of US companies still don’t have a CEO with the capabilities the company needs to succeed in the near term. Some companies are planning their CEO successions more comprehensively and seeing greater success.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings