CEO Confidence | Leadership Pipelines & Development

Identified Country:

CEO and board confidence monitor 2025: Persistent concerns, pockets of increased confidence

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

CEO & Board of Directors CEO and board confidence monitor 2025: Persistent concerns, pockets of increased confidence

Our second annual survey of CEOs and board members at companies around the world highlights a persistent set of significant concerns and a continued lack of confidence in leadership pipelines. However, the results also show that companies have made progress in addressing some of their longer-term concerns.
February 05, 2025

Heidrick & Struggles

Download the full survey

Continued low confidence in managing what matters most—but progress on some issues

The issues CEOs and board members say will be most significant in 2025 are similar to those they identified last year, and CEOs and board members are generally aligned on what’s important.

On the whole, leaders’ confidence in their organization’s ability to manage the issues that matter most to their organizations has changed little since last year. In addition, the issues that the highest shares of directors find significant remain among those they have the least confidence in managing. Regarding economic uncertainty and volatility, an even smaller share of leaders are confident compared to last year.

Leaders in the technology sector are notably more often confident than others in their ability to manage cybersecurity risk, at 75%. And leaders in financial services are most often confident in their ability to manage shifts in market dynamics, at 68%, perhaps a function of their relative and historical strength in crisis management, building risk management frameworks, and being on the front lines of regulatory pressure.
Leaders in the United States and Canada are most confident in their ability to manage increasing expectations from shareholders, at 85%, and those in Asia Pacific and the Middle East least confident, at 45%.

However, leaders do indicate notably greater confidence in their organization’s ability to manage a few issues, including supply chain disruption, workforce attraction and retention, cybersecurity risk, increasing stakeholder expectations, and climate change.

Looking at the combination of significance and confidence in managing, the top issue is cybersecurity risk. Two other concerns are relatively significant, and leaders are relatively confident in managing them: workforce attraction and retention and building or maintaining a healthy organizational culture.

Despite their generally low levels of confidence in managing the most pressing issues, nearly two-thirds of leaders remain confident in the ability of their organization to deliver on its 2025 strategic plan—again, about the same as last year.

Leaders in the United States and Canada are much more confident in their organization’s ability to deliver on the plan than respondents in other regions (71%, compared to a range of 49–58% of respondents in other regions). This is likely related at least in part to their greater confidence in their leadership pipelines.

Continued concern about leadership pipelines

Leaders’ continued notably low levels of confidence in their executive pipeline, CEO succession planning, and board refreshment practices1 indicate that companies still need to continue to increase their focus on long-term topics even when other considerations have higher immediate significance. In this context, it’s good news that 52% of CEOs and directors said their company is increasing its investment in CEO and board succession planning in a survey we conducted earlier this year.2

Leaders in the United States and Canada are more confident than their peers in other regions in all three of these areas. Nonetheless, on CEO succession planning, even they are evenly split: 50% are confident and 49% are not.

Considerations for 2025

CEO succession is one of the most fundamental responsibilities of the board. Yet repeated studies, including our own, demonstrate that it remains low both in the board’s priority stack and in the priority they put on it to address. In our recent study, directors also report relatively low satisfaction with their CEO succession planning and board refreshment processes. There are notable differences based on company size and industry sector, but overall investment remains stubbornly low. Directors will benefit from a closer look at why, which we have explored elsewhere.3
Other research we have conducted suggests two tactics to improve the executive pipeline: extending succession planning far deeper into the organization than it currently goes at most companies and building stronger links between leadership development, promotion, and succession planning efforts.
Over time, we have seen leaders’ confidence grow in their companies’ ability to manage complex issues from cybersecurity to climate change, issues that were at first sources of serious concern and confusion.4 Moving from uncertainty to confidence is important when a lack of knowledge contributes to highly divergent opinions on how to act. An organization’s ability to work effectively across intransigent divides is becoming increasingly important in today’s polarized geopolitical climate. CEOs and directors in the United States are grappling with this now, given the difficult political climate. What they are learning may ultimately build confidence on this difficult area of concern.5

About the research

In November 2024, Heidrick & Struggles fielded an online survey that garnered 930 respondents. Of those, 64% were CEOs and 36% were directors. Forty-nine percent were in Europe; 28% in North America; 14% in Asia Pacific; 5% in Latin America; 4% in the Middle East; and 1% in Africa. Respondents represented companies of all sizes; 30% reported annual revenue of more than US $1 billion. Companies ranged across all industries and ownership structures.

References

1 Though the numbers show minimal improvement, none of the changes are statistically significant.

2 For more, see Jeremy Hanson, “CEO and board confidence monitor: Beating the succession planning paradox,” Heidrick & Struggles, October 30, 2024.

3 For more, see Jeremy Hanson, “CEO and board confidence monitor: Beating the succession planning paradox,” Heidrick & Struggles, October 30, 2024.

4 For more on how boards are managing climate change, sustainability, and geopolitical volatility, see Jeremy Hanson, Claire Skinner, Ron Soonieus, Sonia Tatar, and David Young, Boards and Society: How Boards Are Evolving to Meet Challenges From Sustainability to Geopolitical Volatility, Heidrick & Struggles, November 18, 2024.

5 For more on what we have learned recently about how leaders in the United States think about leading across boundaries and divides, see Jeremy Hanson and Jonathan McBride, “Leading across boundaries and divides,” November 8, 2024.

Related Services & Industries

Board Effectiveness

CEO & Board of Directors

CEO Succession Planning

Frontier Tech

Related Content

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top Europe 2026 | Companies are seeking experienced CEOs—but that isn’t enough

As geopolitical and economic volatility accelerate and technological disruption intensifies, European boards that align CEO development with a broad range of strategic scenarios will be better positioned to navigate disruption, implement fundamental changes, and sustain performance.

Chief Executive Officer

Route to the Top US 2026 | Closing the CEO capability gap

Fortune 500 companies are increasingly appointing new CEOs who have prior experience in the role. However, a new survey finds that more than a third of US companies still don’t have a CEO with the capabilities the company needs to succeed in the near term. Some companies are planning their CEO successions more comprehensively and seeing greater success.

Boards & Governance

Board Monitor US 2026 | Future-focused boards: Linking renewal, alignment, and performance

Fortune 500 boards have recently placed a larger focus operational expertise and prior board experience. Some boards are finding effective ways to balance short- and long-term considerations—and overseeing stronger performance than others.

CEO & Board of Directors

2026 CEO & Board Confidence Monitor: Explore the data

Explore the results of our third annual global survey of CEOs and board members by market, industry, ownership structure, and company size.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings