Supply Chain Leadership Trends | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

The changing leadership styles of supply chain executives, 2016–2024

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Supply Chain & Operations Officers The changing leadership styles of supply chain executives, 2016–2024

Over the past nine years, we have tracked changes in the leadership styles most often used by supply chain executives.
February 14, 2025

Scott Adams ,
Daniel Colaco

Read the full article

Some key facts about chief supply chain officers (CSCOs)

As of December 29, 2024, there were 637 CSCOs in the Fortune 1000, up from 578 CSCOs in May 2024.

Prior experience as a CSCO
80% are first-timers
20% have prior experience as a CSCO

Promotion versus hire
59% are internal appointments
41% are external appointments

Average tenure in role is 4.1 years, slightly down from 4.9 years in May 2024.

Since 2016, more than 5,000 supply chain executives have taken a proprietary Heidrick & Struggles survey1—the combined results of which highlight how much each leader tends toward each of the eight styles of leadership (see chart, “Changing leadership styles of supply chain executives, 2016–2024”).

In 2016, the scores across styles varied little, meaning that supply chain leaders overall used a broad range of styles. Between 2016 and 2019, the share of executives who were more often working as collaborators, energizers, and harmonizers grew fairly steadily, while those tending toward being composers, forecasters, and pilots fell. The core executional focus, which sits with the producer style, changed little.

The shock of the pandemic hit supply chain executives as hard as any, as industries from consumer goods to agriculture scrambled to provide for unforeseen needs and work in life sciences took on unprecedented urgency. As a result, the supply chain function became more strategically important in most companies and the previous leadership trends accelerated significantly: we saw that the collaborator, the energizer, and the harmonizer leadership styles had become significantly more common among the executives we surveyed. And these leadership styles, though having declined in need somewhat as the world has adapted to the impacts of the pandemic, have remained more common to this day, pointing to a new normal for leadership in the supply chain function.

Supply chain leadership: Evolving needs and challenges

The composer mindset, while still relevant, has become less dominant as supply chain functions evolve from a back-end focus to a more collaborative approach. Today’s CSCOs must work seamlessly with other business functions to drive a unified strategy.

The forecaster’s depth of knowledge remains valuable, but the rapidly changing market demands leaders who are agile and adept at addressing new challenges as they arise.

The pilot mindset has also seen a reduced emphasis, similar to the forecaster, as leaders focus on resolving existing backlogs and managing immediate priorities. Only after addressing these challenges can they fully transition to a future-oriented perspective.

In 2020, we hypothesized that the need for supply chain leaders who can transform both their supply chains and their functions would further increase, and that this new generation of leaders would need to be able to navigate constantly changing technology, automation, and engineering tools, as well as adeptly use data and analytics to drive decisions. We argued that this increasing need would be driven by omnichannel consumer requirements and e-commerce-driven supply, along with the entry of new competitors into virtually every sector—making it harder for companies to accurately build supply and demand forecasts (especially in long lead time manufacturing environments).

While this still holds true, it is notable that we have seen the collaborator leader rise in prominence once more, pointing to the growing need for strong people leaders as well. The collaborator, with their empathy and team-building skills, is a leader who can create unity through transition and drive a purpose-driven organizational culture through a focus on developing others.

And, while operations have somewhat stabilized post-pandemic, the harmonizer’s ability to create and sustain a high-energy culture remains a priority as a supply chain executive for driving engagement, productivity, and transformation. The harmonizer, whose reliability and diligence work together to create a stable environment, is, unsurprisingly, particularly valuable in uncertain economic and geopolitical conditions, not to mention in the face of looming challenges and disruptions caused by climate change.

Finally, we have also noted that producer leadership has become more common—that is, leaders who are execution and task focused, linear thinkers, structured, and loyal to tradition—suggesting that traditional leadership skills are still highly valued in the function.

The chief supply chain officer’s knowledge of the intricacies of the function must now be matched with their ability to navigate an uncertain future and keep up with fast-moving digital and technological innovations. Agility will be key, as will communication skills. Leaders and aspiring leaders can best position themselves for the future by examining their own leadership styles and strengths and considering how they can develop those to adapt to a broadening scope of responsibility.

About the authors

Scott Adams (sadams@heidrick.com) is the partner-in-charge of Heidrick & Struggles’ Atlanta office and a member of the global Consumer Markets and Supply Chain & Operations Officers practices.

Daniel Colaco (dcolaco@heidrick.com) is an engagement manager in the Toronto office and a member of the global Consumer Markets and Supply Chain & Operations Officers practices.

Reference

1 To learn more about Heidrick & Struggles’ Leadership Signature survey, see Karen Rosa West, "What's your leadership signature?" Heidrick & Struggles.

Related Services & Industries

Executive Assessment

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Related Content

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Leadership perspectives: A conversation with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain, 3M

Heidrick & Struggles’ Alasdair Spink speaks with Peter Gibbons, former Group President of Enterprise Supply Chain at 3M, on the key skills and leadership capabilities chief supply chain officers need to become future-ready.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Supply-chain officer focus: The strategic value of succession planning

Many organizations where the supply chain is crucial to operations have been elevating the strategic importance of their chief supply chain officers. But talent is scarce, and succession planning is taking on new urgency. Interviews with 30 supply chain leaders suggest three key elements of improvement.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

Managing the semiconductor trilemma: A conversation with Dr. Roawen Chen, chief supply chain and operations officer at Qualcomm

Dr. Roawen Chen shares the leadership capabilities critical to managing the three competing KPIs of the semiconductor industry: pursuing the most advanced technology, having the lowest cost, and having unlimited supply.

Supply Chain & Operations Officers

How AI is delivering value in an integrated supply chain: A conversation with James Borzi, EVP and chief supply chain officer at Baxter International

James Borzi shares how he sees AI continuing to optimize the healthcare supply chain; and what it means to him as a leader to lead in an AI-enabled world.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings