2024 North American Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

2024 North American Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Private Equity 2024 North American Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles' annual survey of investment professionals in North America explores recent compensation data and trends across private equity.
December 11, 2024

Jonathan Goldstein ,
John Rubinetti

Read the full report

Welcome to our 2024 North American Private Equity Investment Professional Compensation Survey. This report provides a comprehensive picture of the compensation that North American private equity executives are currently receiving.

For this report, Heidrick & Struggles compiled compensation data from a survey of 820 investment professionals in North America.

We hope you enjoy reading the survey, which remains the only one of its kind. As always, suggestions are welcome, so please feel free to contact us—or your Heidrick & Struggles representative—with questions and comments.

Executive summary

There has been a pickup in private equity activity in the second half of 2024, which will likely continue in 2025. There are more investment professionals looking for opportunities than in previous years, but firms still need to actively recruit the best candidates.

Firms are adding business development professionals, from relatively junior roles to managing director or partner-level roles.
There is increased focus on investment professionals who can source transactions, even at a junior level.

Given the challenges in finding proprietary deals and the increase in deal multiples, firms have become more focused on hiring operating executives who can help with diligence, post-acquisition plans, and portfolio management.1

Private equity professionals are looking for opportunities where there will be room for growth, along with a good firm culture.

They are paying special attention to track record, DPI, how deployed a firm’s most current fund is, and where the firm’s fundraising stands.
We have seen candidates take a step back in comp in order to invest in longer term upside. We have also seen candidates who will trade upside for a more stable home that is less dependent on the ebbs and flows of fundraising.

Compensation trends

We had expected compensation to flatline in 2024, but respondents report modest gains.

The gains in base, bonus, and carry by assets under management (AUM) of the most recent fund were most noticeable at smaller funds.
Viewed by AUM of all funds, the gains were most noticeable at funds with AUM of $6.00 billion to $9.99 billion.
Partner and managing director compensation increased in 2023 when looking at AUM of the most recent fund, but decreased when viewed by AUM across all funds.
Most respondents reported an increase in their bonus, reversing a recent trend. Large bonuses remain rare and are most frequently found at the managing partner level.
There was an increase in clawbacks and holdbacks at the managing partner level.

For full compensation data, download the full report.

About the authors

Jonathan Goldstein (jgoldstein@heidrick.com) is the regional managing partner of Heidrick & Struggles’ Private Equity Practice for the Americas; he is based in the New York office.

John Rubinetti (jrubinetti@heidrick.com) is a partner in the New York office and a member of the Private Equity Practice.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Mohd Arsalan for his contributions to this report.

Reference

1 Jonathan Goldstein and John Rubinetti, 2024 North American Private Equity Operating Professional Compensation Survey, Heidrick & Struggles, June 26, 2024.

Related Services & Industries

Private Equity

Related Content

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity-Backed Chief Financial Officer Compensation Survey

Explore data from private equity professionals in North America and Europe on organizational structure and compensation for this critical role.

Compensation Trends

2025 Private Equity–Backed Chief Executive Officer Compensation Survey

This report on compensation trends for CEOs at private equity–backed firms in North America and Europe examines demographics and compensation for these professionals.

Leadership Development

Resilient leadership in a PE-backed environment: A conversation with Dino Koutrouki, chief executive officer of Pelsis

Dino Koutrouki shares key principles to drive growth in small private equity-backed companies.

Compensation Trends

2025 Asia-Pacific and Middle East Private Capital Investment Professional Compensation Survey

Heidrick & Struggles’ annual survey of investment professionals in the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions explores recent compensation data and trends across private capital.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings