Chief people officers in focus: Challenges and opportunities for new CPOs in Latin America | Insights | Heidrick & Struggles

Identified Country:

Chief people officers in focus: Challenges and opportunities for new CPOs in Latin America

Share Copy to clipboard LinkedIn X (Twitter) Facebook

Open PDF

Human Resources Officers Chief people officers in focus: Challenges and opportunities for new CPOs in Latin America

The role of the chief people officer globally has expanded into a key strategic position in the C-suite. In Latin America, new CPOs need to be resilient, agile, and curious—able to adapt global trends to their local context to create impact.
December 09, 2024

Luciana Assad ,
Ana Paula Bonilha ,
Guilherme Brandão ,
Lydia Peraza ,
Carlos Vazquez

Read the full article

Five trends shaping the CPO role globally

As well as regional aspects that require careful navigation, Latin American CPOs must grapple with the key trends reshaping the CPO role globally. Our conversations with CPOs across the world have highlighted five themes changing what it means to lead the people function and be a true strategic business partner today:2

AI is driving the data agenda ever faster
Younger workforces are demanding purpose-driven leadership
Sustainability is rising up the people agenda
Workforce planning needs to incorporate flexibility
The well-being agenda is rising ever higher

2 Heidrick & Struggles, October 24, 2024. "Chief people officers in focus: What new HR leaders need to know," Emma Burrows, Sharon Sands, Brad Warga, and Jennifer Wilson

In an environment where more is at stake, more is uncertain, and more is expected of leadership teams, talent has climbed up CEO and board agendas. Around the world, we see the chief people officer (CPO) no longer playing a supportive role; they are becoming more strategic than ever before and central in executive decision-making processes. The role is fast paced and requires sharp business acumen to help mold the organization’s strategic goals, as well as a complementary people strategy (see our article, “Chief people officers in focus: What new HR leaders need to know”).

We talked to 30 chief people officers from the Latin America region to explore the layers of nuance to the role in this part of the world. We heard that it requires careful balancing of global strategies with local priorities and issues, and that there is also an advantage to living in a developing region: many CPOs in Latin America are already agile, resilient, and open to change.

Navigating regional nuance: What it means to be a CPO in Latin America today

As Latin America develops at pace to keep up with more advanced economies, so too does the need for CPOs with local knowledge as well as a deep understanding of the global trends shaping the people function.

Coming into Latin American from outside can be daunting, even for seasoned CPOs who have served in Europe or the United States. One CPO we spoke to admitted: “I had never worked in Latin America; my entire experience had been US-based. I felt overwhelmed—I was supposed to be the expert and lead the team; I had work out very quickly how to save face.”

Indeed, while many Latin America-based CPOs emphasized the advantage of international experience and how it can enrich one’s knowledge, they also stressed that a CPO in Latin America must understand local cultures and business practices. For some, international experience has created a newfound appreciation for the energized local business environment: “Brazilian workers tend to be passionate about their jobs, are willing to work longer hours, and are keen to get involved,” said one.

On the other hand, there is still a lot of work to be done to get the strategic potential of the role better understood in the region. One leader outlined this challenge succinctly: “I worked for a CEO who used to say that the CEO is one of the legs of the tripod bench, the CFO the second leg, and HR is the third leg. If one of those three legs is removed, the chair falls. HR is going to become that for most businesses. However, it will depend on how much ownership we have and how provocative we are in our field, because we have a lot of territory to gain and now we have to prove our value.”

However, in certain countries, some CPOs are making real progress. “The recent labor reforms helped push the HR function to the center of the organization,” one CPO in Mexico told us, adding: “It is now a more business-critical function for the organization on the basis of these new reforms and the financial impact it has on the business.”

The changing status of HR in this region brings new opportunities for CPOs, and there are advantages to being a Latin American executive stepping into a CPO role compared to other markets that have experienced less uncertainty before. Many we spoke to said they have already learned to be resilient to market and political volatility, are used to living with uncertainty, and are more prepared to navigate turbulent times as leaders of change. This agility can give CPOs in the region an edge over their global peers, and help them apply the best of global HR thinking and best practice with a local spin.

We also heard that companies’ relationships with unions in Latin America is now more serious than before, professional, active, and democratized, further making a deep understanding of local trends a necessity for success in the position. Part of the particular challenge, and key to success for Latin America-based CPOs, is their ability to assess global trends them, mold them to suit their specific context, or buck them, where necessary.

Take hybrid working models, where clearly one size doesn’t fit all. A CPO at a company in Brazil, for example, suggested and tested a hybrid working model that was flexible and open to individual employee negotiations, diverging from their parent company’s ‘three days in office, two days remote’ policy. Another example came from a different CPO who referenced how so much of the “knowledge” in the profession is based on European and American understanding, which is why learning the language of stakeholders and employees is so important, instead of using global “HR speak.” Other Heidrick & Struggles research reflects a similar message: HR leaders need to be able to communicate clearly with the business and stay away from technical or ambiguous language.1

When it comes to diversity and inclusion, there is a similar pattern of tailoring global policies to local realities, as while the DEI topics tend to follow global trends, they manifest differently in the region. Some female CPOs spoke of needing to establish credibility in male-dominated executive teams. On this, one remarked, “I didn't feel a lack of business knowledge because I knew so much about the company itself, but I have a gentle manner, and I had to learn to be tough.”

On the related point of diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI), another CPO described how ensuring inclusivity is not always easy in the region: “Currently in management we have 47% female leaders, 30% racially diverse in general, and 20% black people, but these people do not feel included or have a sense of belonging. We have to keep in mind that diversity should also be about perspectives and background.”

Again, as we heard throughout our discussions, CPOs should focus on the regional, and have conviction in their decisions: “The reason we work with DEI is to serve Brazilian society, and we can only achieve this by having the reflection of society in our staff. Our culture is one of consensus; we could hire everyone the same, which would be easier, but by hiring diversity, you have greater problem-solving capacity.”

Advice for new CPOs in Latin America

In that context, the CPOs we spoke to in Latin America shared wide-ranging insights on what has helped them succeed, with some sage advice for new CPOs:

Choose your role and organization carefully: One CPO put an interesting spin on this for those taking on a new position—rather than the company choosing you, you should choose the company based on what you know about yourself. “When looking for a CPO position, make sure to choose an organization that aligns with your own values and goals. The CPO is the face of the organization both within and externally, and you want to be able to feel authentic in your role.”

Develop your relationships with the board and CEO, early on: As the CPO role becomes a strategic one at the interface of business and people, the most important relationship for a CPO in Latin America is with the CEO, then with the board and then the rest of the leadership team. These relationships need to be developed as soon as possible.

Gain the trust of everyone in the company: Relationships with senior leaders are not all that counts in Latin America. Building trust across the organization requires “building credibility and transparency, so that people are sure you are going to present them in a neutral way,” said one CPO.

Develop a thorough understanding of the business, its goals, and strategies: New CPOs must immerse themselves in the day-to-day business, as this CPO did: “I immediately visited all businesses in all the countries and learned a lot from the country directors.” Or, as another CPO simply said: “You can’t talk about the basement if you don’t go down into the basement.”

Back up all strategies and suggestions with data: On this, one CPO said, “You have to provide evidence that you are making an impact. It’s necessary to be prepared to take the discussion to a more strategic place. If your viewpoint is substantiated, it is more credible.”

Have the courage to make tough decisions: Many CPOs hold confidential information and have to make difficult decisions, sometimes with little counsel or advice. This requires courage—as one CPO put it: “The CEO can have no doubt that you are telling him or her the truth, even if it’s a truth they don’t want to hear.” For example, the CPO might need to negotiate a directive coming global headquarters with which the regional CEO doesn’t agree or amplify the voice of the workforce in the leadership team.

Adapt global trends and buck them, if necessary: “Don’t follow the benchmark just because it is the benchmark,” said one CPO. “If you really know the business, create the benchmark.” This is important advice for CPOs in Latin America where many benchmarks are set against a European or US backdrop: “Ideally, I wouldn’t advise you to follow a practice just because you understand that it’s a trend. You need to develop a sense of perspicacity to understand your scenario, the practices that fit your reality.”

Build networks to broaden perspectives and solutions: Formal and informal networks of peers and external experts can prove invaluable for first-time CPOs: “I created an internal network in the corporation to understand the culture and programs and then went to the market to have an external support network. I didn’t try to solve everything myself,” shared one CPO. Another said she relied on “people she trusted in the market to be a sounding board, sharing questions, challenges, testing different pathways I’d thought of.”

Conclusion

Latin America offers unique challenges for individuals stepping into the CPO role, but CPOs working here also have the opportunity and freedom to carve out powerful, more effective leadership roles that marry the best of HR globally with the energy and dynamism of the local business environment. They can learn from their global peers and best practices to evolve their role and influence into a strategic position on par with the CFO, as we see in many companies around the world. “Experimenting with the new, taking risks, bringing in talent, diversity, [and] different generations. There is no recipe,” said one. “We have to discover and evolve on our own through trial and error, and by being brave in making the decision to take the first step.”

About the authors

Luciana Assad (lassad@heidrick.com) is a principal in Heidrick & Struggles’ São Paulo office and a member of the Consumer Markets Practice.

Ana Paula Bonilha (abonilha@heidrick.com) is a partner at Heidrick & Struggles’ São Paulo office and member of the Healthcare & Life Sciences Practice.

Guilherme Brandão (gbrandao@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo offices and a member of the Technology, Human Resources Officers, Legal, Risk, Compliance & Government Affairs, Media & Entertainment, Industrial, Consulting & Advisory Services, and Financial Services practices.

Lydia Peraza (lperaza@heidrick.com) is a partner in Heidrick & Struggles’ Mexico City and Monterrey offices and a member of the global Consumer Markets, Healthcare & Life Sciences, and CEO & Board of Directors practices in Latin America.

Carlos Vazquez (cvazquez@heidrick.com) is the partner in charge of Heidrick & Struggles’ Mexico offices.

Reference

1 Steven Krupp, Brad Warga, and Jennifer Wilson, “The next evolution of HR leadership: The connecting HR leader,” Heidrick & Struggles, September 19, 2024.

Related Services & Industries

Human Resources Officers

Inclusive Leadership

Leadership Development

Related Content

Leadership Development

Becoming purposeful and performance-driven: A conversation with Jean-Luc Fleurial, EVP and CHRO of UCB

Jean-Luc Fleurial, CHRO of a global pharma company, shares how to become a more effective CHRO and build a purposeful, performance-driven culture.

Human Resources Officers

AI focus | VP of AI Workforce Transformation: The newest addition to senior leadership teams

Companies are starting to hire a dedicated senior leader to convert AI adoption into workforce value. How can CEOs and CHROs decide if they need the role, and what should it look like if they do?

Executive Assessment

Workforce planning: Gaps in pipeline management

Explore our data about rising leadership risk, aligning succession strategies, and how disciplined workforce planning can strengthen long-term performance.

Executive Assessment

Leadership assurance: Elevating learning and development as a strategic driver of workforce planning

Learn how HR leaders can link learning and development to board priorities to strengthen succession, retain key talent, and build future-ready capabilities.

View more

Stay connected

Stay connected to our expert insights, thought leadership, and event information.

Subscribe

Leadership Podcast

Explore the latest episodes of The Heidrick & Struggles Leadership Podcast.

Browse episodes

Subscribe

Back To Top

Privacy Preference Center

Your Privacy

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Analytics Cookies

Functional Cookies

Targeting Cookies

Your Privacy

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Analytics Cookies

Analytics Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back Button Back

Vendor Search
Filter Button

Consent Leg.Interest
checkbox label label
checkbox label label
checkbox label label

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Confirm My Choices Allow All

Cookies Button

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.

Accept All Cookies
Reject All
Cookies Settings