UK's Unique Heat Wave Issues

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 30, 2026

UK's Unique Heat Wave Issues

The UK’s recent heat wave has created workplace issues in a country not known for its air conditioning.

The island of Britain is well known for its cool summers, copious rainfall, and bright green fields. Not so long ago, the idea that a British summer could burn your skin or pose a serious health hazard would have seemed absurd. But that ship has now sailed.

The temperature in London was recently hovering at around 94 degrees Fahrenheit, a very high temperature for Britain. Even as it cools a bit, the EU now faces similarly hot weather, the result of an El Niño weather pattern. But while other parts of the world, such as the US, are used to hot summers, Britain and much of the EU haven’t embraced air conditioning in their aging infrastructure, which includes schools, trains, and some workplaces. In short, hiding from the heat is becoming a challenge that creates stress for employees and new challenges for leaders.

Historically, life-threatening heat waves in the UK have been very rare. “Hot weather is simply not part of British culture,” says Stuart Richards, a Korn Ferry EMEA market leader, consumer industry. “We are not used to it.” With rare exceptions, the country historically experiences cool summers and warm winters. That’s quite unlike the US and mainland Europe, where winters are usually frigid and the summer is frequently baking hot.

A widespread lack of air conditioning in the UK means schools are closing and parents have to stay home to look after their children instead of going to work. “One thing we should recognize is that the northern European climates have not invested in air conditioning,” says John Atherton, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. Even if people work in a corporate office that has air conditioning, they often use UK public transport—which typically doesn’t have it—to get there. “Be mindful in how you get to work,” says Richards.

A little-noticed issue, experts say, is that high temperatures can impair concentration. Coming in from the heat, workers may make mistakes. Conflicts among colleagues may grow. Absenteeism can be a concern, with some people skipping work, claiming sickness, in order to sunbathe, experts say.

While leaders can’t change the weather, of course, experts say they can help employees through it. This is a health and safety matter, and executives are still bound to follow these requirements. “We have experience being creative in response to threats such as work-from-home during the pandemic," says Sean Byrne, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. “Now, with the heat, we are looking at something else we need to be creative with.” That could include allowing more work breaks, relaxing dress codes, and offering flexible working hours, so workers can avoid the hottest part of the day. “As businessmen, we’ve gone from wearing woolen three-piece suits to Bermuda shorts,” he says. “That would have been hard to countenance even 10 years ago.”

HR should not wait for a crisis to arrive before creating a strategy. Executives need to plan how they’re going to manage during a heat wave or other unusual weather, such as massive flooding. Discussions should take place about who needs to be in the workplace, who can work from home, and how decisions are made, experts say.

Short-term measures are all very good, but experts say what really needs to happen is an improvement in the UK’s infrastructure. The country needs to consider upgrading infrastructure to address excessive heat, Richards maintains. “In hot climates, the technology is available to make schools cool,” he says.

The heat wave does have a silver lining, Atherton says: During blisteringly hot periods, working in an air-conditioned office could be more attractive. “It is something that could bring people together to some extent during a time of volatility,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Stuart Richards
EMEA Market Leader, Consumer Industry

John Atherton
Senior Client Partner

Sean Byrne
Senior Client Partner, UK Government and Public Services, Consulting

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Organization Design & Analytics

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by