6’1”, Loves Hiking, Seeks Series A Funding

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 18, 2026

6’1”, Loves Hiking, Seeks Series A Funding

Hoping to boost careers, one in six workers are employing dating apps to build professional connections. Is it job at first sight?

After three months of sending out job applications and hearing nothing but crickets, the laid-off employee had an idea: What if she reached out to people on Hinge? She’d previously met lots of interesting professionals in the course of previous dating efforts; a couple of them had even become colleagues. So why not try again now, with the intention of bagging a new job?

With frustration about the job market reaching new heights, a remarkable number of desperate candidates have turned to an unorthodox networking source: dating apps. Indeed, a recent poll found that 15% of workers have used dating apps for professional networking, while another 14% have considered it. Experts say that despite a recent hiring uptick, these numbers are only going to grow. “It can work if there’s industry alignment,” says business psychologist James Bywater, a senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “Relationships are a spectrum of possibilities.” A new contact can become a best colleague, a neutral acquaintance, or a worst enemy.

To be sure, dating apps are still primarily used for dating. But at a time when everyone’s inboxes are overflowing and many power wielders rarely set foot in an office, crossing paths with someone who can ignite a career can feel like finding a golden ticket. These kinds of encounters can seem particularly impossible when scrolling LinkedIn, land of unreachable contacts. “Most people don’t stand out on LinkedIn,” says Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “It takes effort and skill.”

In all, one in ten users now primarily visit dating apps for career purposes, according to a survey by Resume Builder. Tinder, Bumble, and Facebook Dating are the most popular choices. Networking daters are focused: Many (66%) aim to connect with people at prestigious companies; many others (43%) say they have enjoyed mentorship or gotten important career advice.

This strategy can backfire and produce unwanted or useless connections, of course. But the data suggests that it’s working so far, with 88% of respondents in the Resume Builder survey reporting they’ve successfully made a work connection. Landing job referrals or leads is common (37%), as is a job offer (38%). Just 10% say their networking efforts were unsuccessful. (For those paying attention, this makes dating apps much more fruitful for work connections than long-term relationships, for which success rates hover between 10% and 25%.)

The question is how honest job seekers should be about their motives. Experts say that they’ll be forced to confess rather quickly, given that first-date conversations and networking outreach are very different. “The questions one asks colleagues deviate quite quickly from dating questions,” notes Bywater. Rather than inquiring about hobbies and life plans and pets and favorite foods, professional conversations bend toward current work efforts and how one got there and career advice.

And there’s always a risk of offending someone. After all, who wouldn’t be put off to discover that the date they’ve been anticipating is actually a meeting about someone’s career objectives? “It’s purposely misleading,” says Amato, who urges honesty over subterfuge. If professional kismet “happens naturally, that’s serendipity and fantastic. But trying to force it is going to backfire.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

James Bywater
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Feb 16 - Feb 22)
Cutting Out the Business Partner?

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Sales Performance