How to Identify and Leverage Leadership Capabilities

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Talent Recruitment|April 18, 2023

How to Identify and Leverage Leadership Capabilities

Finding an executive with the right balance of technical and leadership skills is challenging. Here's what to look for when recruiting a new leader.

Key takeaways

How to find a balance between technical and leadership skills
Which characteristics to look for during the recruitment process
Where to recruit true leaders outside of traditional talent sources

Technical expertise and dynamic leadership are not mutually exclusive. Finding a true balance between technical and leadership skills requires understanding your company’s strategic objectives and operational culture. With proper training and mentorship, these considerable business skills have the potential to merge into a powerful, successful partnership. But how you attract these leaders—and propel them on an upward course of success―rests primarily on identifying fundamental characteristics during the recruitment process. It is through the integration of these finely-tuned attributes that the most capable leaders emerge.

Top traits & capabilities to assess when identifying leaders

Listed below are key traits and leadership capabilities to assess in complement with your executive search strategy:

Communications skills: The success of any team depends on the effective translation of knowledge to others. Genuine leaders empower their teams by keeping others informed through knowledge sharing. They can organize people and processes, and they can communicate what needs to be done, who should be doing it, and why. Especially with Generations Y and Z, the ability to explain why you’re doing what you’re doing and being open to suggestions on how to improve it can make or break a team.

Creating & sustaining relationships: Great leaders treat those around them with respect and create a professional environment in which knowledge and expertise is valued and incorporated into the decision-making process. They know when to encourage and how to hold employees accountable. They listen but are not acquiescent, understanding that the best way is not always the most popular. They support their employees but do not tolerate incompetence. Great leaders find value in building and nurturing these relationships, and it is through open communication channels that they create an environment of trust and support.

Understands personal strengths & weaknesses: Great leaders intrinsically know themselves, yet self-knowledge is perhaps the most challenging, intangible and subjective characteristic to assess in others. Self-awareness allows leaders to better relate to others and to appreciate the people and personality types that best complement their abilities and inabilities. They are willing to admit their mistakes and use them to help their team perform better in the future. They understand that being a leader can sometimes be lonely, but continually offer support and a solid role model to those around them.

Professional Search

Find the right people for the right roles to deliver your strategy

Learn more

Thinking outside the box to recruit strong leaders

To recruit real leaders, look beyond traditional talent sources and start spending time where they do. Attend seminars, industry conferences and leadership programs. These events provide a wealth of networking prospects. Wherever you find industry advancement opportunities, you’ll find people who may be the answer to your talent needs.

In many industries, outstanding leaders need technical knowledge. But all leaders must also be able to effectively translate their knowledge throughout the teams they lead. That’s the combination of skills you should seek.

To learn more, contact us today.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Professional Search

Featured Insights

Briefings Podcast: Stop the Fake Compliments
Briefings Podcast: Always the Hire, Never the Fire
Britain’s AI Experiment: Down in Jobs So Far
The Vague Definition of ‘AI Cheating’

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Talent Recruitment

Professional Search