Who’s Balancing the Books?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 15, 2023

Who’s Balancing the Books?

An acute shortage of both entry-level and senior accountants has an industry—and its clients—worried.

No one particularly likes paying taxes, but for decades, young people fresh out of college have found steady careers as accountants.

But this May, as colleges confer degrees on the latest batch of new grads, fewer and fewer are finding accounting an attractive field. It’s a cause of concern across industries, from organizations looking for new recruits to help balance the books to big professional-services firms which derive substantial revenue from accounting services. It’s top of mind for the International Federation of Accountants and its member organizations around the globe. “The numbers are definitely concerning,” says Jeff Constable, co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Global Financial Officers practice.

More than 300,000 US accountants and auditors have left their jobs in the past couple of years, a 17% decline in overall industry employment, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. At the same time, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants says fewer people are graduating with accounting degrees than in years past, and the number of people taking and passing the certified public accountant exam is dropping.

Experts trace the accountant shortfall to several causes. To begin with, the starting pay for graduates working in accounting can seem low. The median graduate working in accounting had a starting salary of $66,504 in 2021, compared with $97,562 in data science and $101,401 in tech, according to the Burning Glass Institute, a nonprofit that researches employment trends. What’s more, salaries for accountants haven’t risen at the pace of other professional-service roles—assuming would-be accountants even get that far. Most accounting roles, particularly at professional-service organizations, require a person to take 150 credit hours, then pass the certified public accountant exam. Meanwhile, there’s widespread anxiety about recent developments in artificial intelligence, which may significantly alter the role of entry- or even mid-level accountants.

Then there are the traditional long hours. “Busy season” at a large accounting firm can mean months of 60- to 100-hour workweeks. Accountants focusing on small businesses or individuals could pull 50- to 60-hour weeks at tax time.

Long hours wouldn’t be as significant a problem if people felt that being an accountant had a greater purpose, says JT Saunders, Korn Ferry’s chief diversity officer. “People are searching for more than just hours, and they might not necessarily get that with their organizations,” he says. It’s a disconnect felt outside the United States as well. “Accounting is not the first place to change the world,” says Mark Lancelott, a UK-based Korn Ferry senior client partner.

The last accountant shortage occurred during the late 1990s, for reasons that sound familiar today: very long work hours for pay that wasn’t keeping up with other professions. Firms adjusted their practices and again became attractive employers, Constable says. Now, companies will have to make similar adjustments. They’ve already begun. Accounting organizations have been raising their starting pay over the last few years. In many cases, firms have extended the remote- or hybrid-work schedules they offered during the pandemic as well. Because of how critical the accounting profession is to the world’s economies, Constable is optimistic that organizations will, over time, adjust once again.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Professional Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jeff Constable
Office Managing Partner, Senior Client Partner, Co-Leader Global Financial Officers Practice

JT Saunders
Chief Talent Development Officer

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Consumer & Commercial Financial Services

FinTech

Financial Services

Professional Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by