Virtual vs. In-Person? Assessments Are Neutral

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Virtual vs. In-Person? Assessments Are Neutral

Social distancing drives a greater need for virtual work, including in the area of assessments. In a new report, the Korn Ferry Institute highlights the robustness of executing leadership simulations virtually.

Social distancing—or "compassionate spacing," an alternative framing—is resulting in multiple compare-and-contrast armchair experiments. Is online shopping better or worse? Is video messaging grandparents a satisfactory way to connect? Are virtual hangouts as good as hallway conversations? Results vary by personal opinion, but in the area of assessing leadership readiness via simulations, research provides an objective comparison.

Given the unpredictable nature of the novel coronavirus outbreak, it is important to reaffirm that simulation assessments given virtually are both as valid and as valuable as those delivered in person. Until the advent of technology-enabled remote simulations leadership simulation assessments were done in-person, composed of interviews, tests, and a variety of live interactive business simulations. However, this can be time-consuming—not to mention logistically challenging during a global pandemic.

Virtual delivery, on the other hand, “is more efficient, offers more flexibility, as well as time and cost savings from travel,” says Stu Crandell, senior client partner and assessment leader for Korn Ferry’s CEO and Board practice.

Virtual assessments have grown in popularity or interest over the years, in part due to the changing nature of work. “Most executives have more distributed teams, a global workforce, and are leading and managing virtually all the time,” says Crandell. “(But) the need for virtual delivery that provides comparable quality with more flexibility, time savings, and health precautions is accelerated with the pandemic.”

In the report, “Equally Robust: Virtual vs. In-Person Simulation Assessments,” the Korn Ferry Institute shows how virtual simulation assessments can deliver comparable participant experience, predictive power, and developmental value for individuals and their organizations. To ensure that participant satisfaction and score comparability did not change when virtual assessments were used, Korn Ferry also studied 168 face-to-face participants and 947 virtual participants employed at a global communications company.

The mode of assessment differed only for the leadership simulations (including a simulation of a direct report meeting) and an interview. A composite of these scores served as the outcome variable of interest. The control was the components completed via computer by all participants, including personality and derailing trait measures, an in-basket exercise, and a participant background questionnaire.

The results showed that virtual assessments are comparable to face-to-face assessments. In fact, participants rated the virtual assessment experience as more engaging and reported that it presents a more realistic business situation. “Nine out of ten participants found the virtual assessment to be engaging and valuable,” says Evelyn Orr, chief operating officer of the Korn Ferry Institute. “And, nine in ten managers said it provided focus and useful strategies for development. These tremendous reviews attest to the high-quality participant experience.”

Our Expert

Our Experts

Stuart S. Crandell
Senior Client Partner

Evelyn Orr
Senior Client Partner, Board & CEO Succession

Sarah Hezlett
Vice President, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Download PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Assessment & Succession

Leadership & Professional Development

Business Transformation

Kornferry2 LD

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by