No New Office, No RTO?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 24, 2026

No New Office, No RTO?

With office-building construction dropping by a third in three years, some companies may not be able to get stricter about RTO.

It’s a simple observation: If a firm wants more workers back in the office, they’d better have space for them. But the latest office-construction and office-leasing numbers suggest more firms may be backing away from full RTO plans.

According to the latest figures, office-building construction spending has fallen by more than one-third in just three years, from more than $70 billion annually in 2022 to $44 billion in 2025. Meanwhile, office leasing in the US fell by 10% last year. Real-estate experts say that while many factors can affect construction, such as interest rates, the data suggests corporate RTO plans may be slowing. “Occupancy has improved significantly, but has not expanded to the point where it would warrant building in many places,” says Anthony LoPinto, global sector leader of Korn Ferry’s Real Estate practice.

The office-building boom that began prior to the COVID-19 pandemic wasn’t significantly affected by it. Between 2020 and 2023, annual spending on office construction was at least $60 billion, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. It’s the behavior of office workers since the pandemic subsided that has given real-estate developers pause.

As the COVID-19 vaccine became readily available in 2021, office occupancy in major US cities floated at between 30% and 45% of pre-pandemic levels. Five years later, it’s risen, but only to 56% of the pre-pandemic rate, according to Kastle Systems, which tracks key swipes at office buildings.

That stat might frustrate the leaders who firmly believe their organizations are better off when most people are working in the same place at the same time. Some of those leaders succeeded in bringing their workers back to the office full-time, but many did not. Some stopped pushing for full-time office work, fearing it might alienate both existing and potential employees. “There’s a war for the soul of corporate America when it comes to this,” says JP Sniffen, practice leader for Korn Ferry’s Center for Military Center of Expertise.

Other bosses found that a hybrid schedule, if well designed and executed, can improve an organization’s productivity and reduce its need for office space. Kate Shattuck, a Korn Ferry managing partner, has one client whose senior team members gather together four times a year for five straight days of intense work, then spend the rest of the quarter working remotely. “Some organizations are getting this right,” she says.

Real-estate developers are willing to spend on one category only: high-end buildings with luxurious amenities in prime locations where people want to work. LoPinto says places like Park Avenue in New York City are seeing plenty of building and commanding massive premiums on rents. “If you’re in an A+ location, the demand is there,” he says. Kastle’s data backs that idea: Average occupancy at these so-called A+ buildings is 79%, more than 20 percentage points higher than the average. The issue, of course, is that there are only so many prime locations. Across 57 markets in the US, only 830 buildings—2% of the total—are considered “prime locations,” according to a 2024 report by real-estate firm CBRE.

Many developers won’t commit to new construction outside prime areas unless workers return to the office and occupancy improves, says Nick Prewitt, a senior associate in Korn Ferry’s Real Estate practice. “The suburban-office outlook remains bleak,” he notes. Instead of building new office buildings, many developers are trying to retrofit older ones in non-prime locations to make them more attractive. Others, having given up entirely on the idea of attracting office dwellers, are converting underused buildings into condominiums, apartments, or, ironically, data centers.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Employee Experience capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Anthony LoPinto
Global Sector Leader, Real Estate

JP Sniffen
Practice Leader, Military COE & Physical Security

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Real Estate