5 Ways to Tailor Skills to What Firms Want

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 3, 2026

5 Ways to Tailor Skills to What Firms Want

Despite the tough job market, experts say firms do want to hire—but that there’s a serious mismatch in skills.

There are more than 6.5 million job openings in the US right now. Some companies are desperately seeking new talent. Yet in many areas, hiring has slowed to a crawl. Experts say that there’s a big mismatch between what employers want and what many job seekers can currently provide.

The stats are stark. To find a new role, an unemployed person needs an average of 11 weeks. Countless others are stuck in unsatisfying jobs and spending months or longer looking for new opportunities. Some historians are reminded of similar mismatches that were seen during the industrial revolution of the 18th and 19th centuries and the tech disruption of the late 20th century.

However daunting the challenge may appear, experts believe that job seekers can rise to meet it if they put in a little work. Unemployed workers might learn a new skill or volunteer. People looking to switch roles might try some lateral thinking or a new approach to interviewing. If you spend 45 hours working, dedicate one of those hours to career-planning and growth activities, suggests Val Olson Armstrong, a Korn Ferry leadership and career coach. “Don’t just focus on your job without focusing on your career,” she says.

Here are several suggestions to help you close the gap between what you can offer now and what your next employer is likely to want.

Pair technical learning with your human strengths. The World Economic Forum says AI can’t replicate human beings’ critical-thinking, problem-solving, and creative skills, so strengthening your own will boost your career. Build critical-thinking skills so you can analyze complex, fast-moving situations and make decisions quickly in ambiguous circumstances, says Armstrong.

Become AI literate, not just AI aware. Many organizations are still investing much of their AI-related energy into “time saving”—using the tools to cut minutes and hours off tasks. But there are plenty of other things AI could do, and you can create a lot of value by helping a firm look beyond the time-saving lens. “Those skills should put people in good stead to help organizations prepare for the next stage in their AI-value evolution,” says David Ellis, Korn Ferry’s senior vice president of talent transformation.

This type of AI awareness also pays. Workers with advanced AI skills can expect as much as a 56% premium in pay, one study shows.

Don’t just ladder-climb. For years we were taught always to aim upward in our careers—to progress from assistant to associate to manager and beyond. But today’s market no longer moves that way. Getting involved in short-term project work, including freelancing or even volunteering, can demonstrate adaptability, says Angela Galle Sylvester, a Korn Ferry executive and career coach. That work will not only broaden your experiences and skills, it will also build career resiliency and adaptability—both highly sought-after traits.

Don’t be shy about bragging. “We often think that our experience or résumé will speak for itself, but not everyone knows what we have done, or the impact we can provide,” Galle Sylvester says. So speak out. Workers who clearly articulate their capabilities are significantly more likely to be considered for stretch roles and internal opportunities.

Of course, don’t just brag for the sake of bragging. Articulate how your capabilities can help the organization meet its needs. “Perceived relevance is key,” Ellis says.

Take ownership of learning new skills. Don’t wait for firms to offer training. Raise your hand and ask for it. Many industries are now incorporating structured AI-learning programs into their employee-development initiatives. You can also invest in learning on your own. The good news is that training doesn’t need to be expensive, either in time or money. The Google AI Essentials learning hub, for instance, offers free short lessons in the use of non-technical AI applications. You can also sign up for any of various newsletters, such as Superhuman AI, to learn practical AI-use cases and productivity tips.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

David Ellis, PhD
Senior Vice President, Talent Transformation

Angela Galle Sylvester

Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career