Internships: The Only Way In?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 8, 2026

Internships: The Only Way In?

More firms are offering internships this summer, but that creates a difficult decision for grads who are not finding work.

A recent college graduate is considering whether to accept a summer internship. It’s a ten-week job, in New York City, with a small stipend—she’ll need to dig into her savings to cover rent, and will be living across the country from her boyfriend and family. The company running the internship program only hired a third of last summer’s participants. Is it worth it?

This year, most interns, perhaps with no other choices, are saying yes. The good news is that firms are planning to bring in 3.9% more interns this year. The bad news is that companies will hire 3.1% fewer interns into entry-level jobs, according to figures from the National Association of Colleges and Employers. In other words: more interns, fewer jobs. “Fewer opportunities means even fewer chances of young people getting into that pipeline,” says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

For college students, graduates, and college employment offices alike, this is evolving into a job crisis. The underemployment rate for recent college graduates is 42.5%, the highest since the pandemic, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Post-graduate placement in corporate jobs is a selling point for many universities. “If you’re the head of placement at a university, 3% is going to feel like 30%—any decrease is pretty horrifying,” says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics at Korn Ferry.

Amidst the turmoil, the concept of who internships are for is shifting. Once an optional summer activity for college students, who could depend on eventually finding their way to a corporate job, internships are now available to high-school students (firms view them as a fresh batch of potential talent to screen and imbue with brand awareness), as well as to recent college graduates and even grad students, both of whom may now see the unpaid gigs as their only entrée into jobs. “Internships are really picking up speed and becoming how young people build a portfolio of experience,” says HR expert Ron Porter, senior partner at Korn Ferry.

The culprit is AI, which which researchers from Harvard University warn is “eroding the bottom rungs of career ladders.” At companies that have integrated AI into their operations, junior positions have been shrinking. Globally, entry-level job postings fell by 29% from January 2024 to September 2025, according to figures from Randstad. In software, 60% of entry-level jobs require more than three years of experience, according to one analysis.

For both applicants and firms, the situation is difficult: There are far fewer entry-level spots than there are interns. Candidates must decide whether it’s worth relocating, often on a limited budget, for an experience that may well lead to naught. Meanwhile, internship managers have to look at dozens of eager faces, knowing that most will be sent home at the end of the season. And the scramble—even for openings—continues. “It’s a buyer’s market,” says Vied.

‍

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Ronald Porter
Senior Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by