Identifying Future Leaders

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Identifying Future Leaders

Korn Ferry’s new report highlights the markers of high leadership potential.

For organizations seeking the next generation of leaders, it is important to zero in on how to quickly and accurately identify people with leadership potential. How can organizations do this successfully? We know that solely relying on performance or gut instinct can lead many talented people to be overlooked. The best bet? Look for the strong rudders that steer leaders steadily through uncertain, unpredictable, and changing situations.

“When it comes to identifying high potential talent for top leadership pipelines, organizations sometimes have a knowing versus doing gap,” says Ilene Gochman, senior partner and global lead for Korn Ferry’s Assessment and Succession practice. “They know they need to be objective, but they fall back on habits like relying on performance or manager’s opinions.”

By using objective measures, such as a psychometric-based assessment, organizations can accurately identify people with a strong foundation for becoming future leaders. This reduces bias and may result in finding a more plentiful supply of leaders in your pipeline for critical executive roles.

“Harnessing the ‘power of all’ requires identifying people with senior leadership potential early in their careers,” says Jane Stevenson, leader of Korn Ferry’s CEO Succession and Board practice. “Preparing people for executive leadership positions, including CEO, can take 15 to 20 years of purposeful career planning and key development experiences.” This process is facilitated when development efforts are tailored based on assessment results.

In its new report, Identifying High Potential,the Korn Ferry Institute shares its latest research on the markers of high leadership potential. Although not every leader will become a CEO, those with potential can contribute exponentially more to their companies if they are identified and nurtured. And, given today’s hyperchanging, hyperdemanding landscape, the importance of finding and preparing our future leaders has never been more critical.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ilene Gochman, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, Global Expert Assessment and Succession Solutions

Evelyn Orr
Senior Client Partner, Board & CEO Succession

Sarah Hezlett
Vice President, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Download PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Leadership & Professional Assessments

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by