Where Have All the CEO Idols Gone?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|February 23, 2026

Where Have All the CEO Idols Gone?

Emerging leaders and younger workers say they’re not finding CEOs to be models or mentors. How can leaders regain the trust they need?

Key Takeaways

3 ways leaders can rebuild trust with employees
Why leadership development programs need to ask different questions
The importance of listening to the next generation of leaders

Three Ways Leaders Can Rebuild Trust

If you ask rising members of the C-suite which CEOs they look up to these days for guidance in leading and motivating the workforce, you may get a blank stare, an awkward pause—or a blunt “There are none.”

In an environment marked by deep uncertainty, one in which leaders are grappling to do their best to captain the ship, an unintended consequence is emerging: leaders in the next generation don’t feel they have mentors to look up to. Indeed, according to the 2025 Edelman Trust Barometer, 68% of respondents say they feel “deliberately misled” by business leaders, up 12 percentage points from the year before. What’s more, only 36% of respondents said the next generation will be better off than today’s. “Leadership and boards don’t reward purpose as much, and we’re seeing a lot of that in their decisions,” says Elise Schroeter, Global Head of Organization and Talent Strategies at Korn Ferry. “Too many seem focused on protecting themselves instead of protecting the planet, and on people over profit.”

Pressure to pump up stock prices and appease eager investors has made it difficult for CEOs and boards to consistently espouse purpose and mission. “Right now, those making decisions are influencing the next generation with an eye toward greed and power,” says Tierney Remick, co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. At the same time, unrealistic expectations of what success looks like— particularly on social platforms like LinkedIn—have distorted perceptions of what’s realistic. “People out there are bragging about their accomplishments so much that it’s difficult to tell what’s real,” Schroeter says.

But younger generations may have learned through observation to distrust mindsets that prioritize short-term gains, says Jane Edison Stevenson, vice chair of Korn Ferry’s CEO and Board Services practice. The result has been broader skepticism about and mistrust of a leadership whose social and economic failures young leaders have grown up with. Here are three steps leaders and organizations can take to rebuild trust with tomorrow’s leaders.

1. Take Accountability

Instead of viewing younger generations as out of touch with reality or too skeptical, step forward and acknowledge where leadership has fallen short. Make your awareness visible through your own behavior, experts say. Consistently demonstrate your values in everyday decisions—not just in crisis moments or through public statements, but in how you allocate resources, promote talent, and navigate stakeholder interests.

2. Shore Up Leadership Pipelines

Leadership development has declined significantly in recent years as many programs have been cut or underfunded. In the ones that remain, there hasn’t been enough emphasis on what leadership values are nonnegotiable—irrespective of business results, Stevenson notes. She recommends that leadership development programs dive into meaty questions such as, “How are leaders treating people while driving stock prices?” or “Are they using their power to dismantle others?”

Sales Effectiveness

Breakthrough to immediate, predictable and sustainable sales effectiveness

Learn more

3. Engage Younger Leaders Sooner

Companies can shore up talent pipelines by bringing high-potential leaders into the system sooner. For example, is there an opportunity for the next generation of leaders to speak with the board? “Listen to them through the lens of ‘how should we approach this differently?’” Schroeter says. “Don’t be tone-deaf or hide in your ivory tower.”

Explore how Korn Ferry is preparing tomorrow’s leaders today.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tierney Remick
Vice Chairman,  Co-Leader, Board & CEO Services

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

Elise Schroeter
Global Head, Organization & Talent Strategies, Board & CEO Practice, Managing Partner, CEO/C-Suite Impact Accelerator

Featured Insights

The Hidden Cost of First-Time CEOs

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Board & CEO Services

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Board & CEO Services