Styles and Climate in a Time of Crisis

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Styles and Climate in a Time of Crisis

Leadership styles and organizational climate scores do not appear impacted by the upheaval throughout 2020.

Wildfires. Racial unrest. Financial uncertainty. A global pandemic. If it were a movie script, the executive producers likely would dismiss it as being over the top.

But, if the film were made, how would the script writers depict the leaders in it? Would the heroes use the same leadership styles in these perilous times? Would their impact on the climate experienced by their direct reports be different?

Of course, we are not living on a movie set. These are tragically real challenges faced by leaders today. In the past, CEOs have made small shifts in their style of leading when faced with a crisis. For example, in the 2008 Great Recession or more recently, the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union, on average, leaders tended to become more directive, according to Korn Ferry research. They engaged in more close supervision, monitoring their employees’ work progress, and controlling the decision making within the organization.

The Korn Ferry Institute dug deep into our databases to evaluate whether or not similar trends emerged during the coronavirus pandemic. Specifically, we asked: are direct reports rating their managers differently on their leadership styles or the climates they create since the pandemic began?

Unexpectedly, the answer, so far, is, “No.”

Our Expert

Our Experts

Sarah Hezlett
Vice President, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Download PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Executive Search

Leadership & Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by