Use AI on the Job—Or Else

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 4, 2026

Use AI on the Job—Or Else

Firms are shifting from the carrot to the stick, rating employees on their AI usage as part of performance reviews. Why some leaders feel it’s a needed step.

On her performance review, the manager noticed a new category. Underneath “quality of work” and “productivity and efficiency” she discovered something called “technology utilization.” She was puzzled.

AI usage is swiftly making its way into performance reviews. Whether they’re calling it “technology innovation” or “technology agility,” firms are increasingly measuring employees’ use of AI, following a year in which worker access to AI grew by 50%, according to a new report. Experts say that for the most part, they smell smoke. “There’s an over-rotation here,” says Bryan Ackermann, head of AI strategy and transformation at Korn Ferry. “This isn’t a measure of learning agility.”

To some degree, AI usage as a standard employee metric makes sense, especially since companies have invested heavily in AI development in recent years—$252 billion in 2024 alone, according to figures from Stanford University. Executives are keen for these very expensive AI systems to be used, and to show demonstrable returns on investment to stakeholders, including impatient activist investors. All of that requires immediate employee adoption, and firms are using a stick rather than a carrot, by directly tying AI usage to promotions and salary increases. “It’s happening in the interest of a massive push to prove that AI investments made sense,” says Ackermann.

The trend of including AI use in performance reviews has trickled into many industries. “This is a huge initiative in tech-forward companies,” says Paul Fogel, sector leader in the Software practice at Korn Ferry. Critically, performance reviews frequently measure not just whether an employee engages AI tools during the workday, but also whether they have improved their workflows or created efficiencies—challenging metrics for workers who may not naturally think in those terms.

To be sure, firms have long tracked internal tech systems. Monitoring AI usage provides an array of employee data, from the projects and clients taking up most of their time, to the problems they’re struggling with, to their relative skill at prompting. Analyzing the data can reveal whether AI is augmenting their work or masking weaknesses. But employees are leery, because over time, AI usage can create a detailed behavioral blueprint.

Experts advise that discussion and evaluation of AI usage be continuous—rather than quarterly or annual—as part of an integrated approach to adopting the technology. The success of these initiatives will pivot not on employee ratings but on AI training: Counterintuitively, the employees least likely to use AI are often those, such as tech writers or software developers, who have spent their careers learning a particular skill or expertise. “There’s a natural reluctance there,” says Fogel. “You can’t expect people to natively adapt.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Bryan Ackermann
Senior Vice President, Head of AI Strategy & Transformation

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by