Becoming Your Own Expert on Pay

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 31, 2026

Becoming Your Own Expert On Pay

Workers are sending three million messages a day to ChatGPT about wages and compensation, intensifying negotiations.

Before asking her boss for a raise, the manager checked in with someone knowledgeable about salaries in her field. No, it wasn’t a colleague—it was ChatGPT, which in four minutes told her the average compensation benchmarks for her industry, and offered guidance on how to phrase her request.

Welcome to compensation negotiations in 2026. Employees who previously might never have heard of a pay band are coming to the table with encyclopedic knowledge of compensation for their roles, catching managers off guard. “What used to be insider knowledge is now accessible in seconds,” says Tom McMullen, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “It’s fundamentally changing the tone of negotiations.”

To be sure, some workers have always come in with sharp negotiation tactics. But experts say the overall shift in the dynamic of compensation conversations could become significant. By prompting their AI platform, workers can instantly see everything from pay benchmarks and negotiation strategies to explanations of complex, formerly opaque reward structures. “We’ve moved from pay being a taboo topic to one that’s more out in the open,” adds McMullen.

AI is not the only culprit. Much of the compensation data available to AI is driven by post-pandemic legislative changes to pay-transparency laws; the internet has been flooded with US-centric compensation numbers. “It’s an unintended consequence of putting all that data out into the world under transparency guidelines,” says Bryan Ackermann, head of AI strategy and transformation at Korn Ferry.  “It surprises me not one little bit.”

Of course, employee findings are not necessarily accurate. Some workers anchor their negotiations to external-compensation data, which can be a far cry from internal budget realities. This can set up a difficult dynamic: Employees are more proactive and confident, and negotiation dynamics can intensify. In one common scenario, workers are putting a dollar amount on their degree and years of experience that doesn’t necessarily correspond to their worth in the marketplace. “They’re looking at the wrong indicators,” says benefits expert Ron Seifert, senior client partner at Korn Ferry—overlooking traits like performance, unique skills, and potential.

Still, employees and candidates can now potentially ask pointed questions about everything from total rewards to internal parity—terms that have ordinarily been tossed around HR offices, not the water cooler. Their inquiries require managers to sharpen their skills. For example, a worker might question the gap between external salary data and the company’s pay rates. “Often, organizations have not adequately equipped their managers and HR staff to answer these questions,” says McMullen. Simply put, AI is quickly exposing training gaps around compensation discussions.

The leverage shift is a reminder that firms need to adopt a strong and sensible pay-compensation program, one that projects a story employees can understand, rather than dodging questions. Along those lines, it makes sense to lean into the increasing sophistication of these employees. “The snowball is rolling down the hill, and you’re not going to stop it,” says Seifert. Managers can expect employees to be prepared to discuss topics that are linked to compensation in their minds, like development opportunities. The shift also can motivate firms to modernize reward strategies, improve internal equity, and create balanced conversations between employees and leaders. “Compensation is no longer a black box—it’s a conversation,” says McMullen.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Bryan Ackermann
Senior Vice President, Head of AI Strategy & Transformation

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by