Because Laughter is the Best Medicine

Article

Briefings Magazine

Insight Articles

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Briefings Magazine|March 29, 2024

Because Laughter is the Best Medicine

Six podcasts for your daily dose of funny.

See the latest issue of Briefings at newsstands or read in our new format here.

Life is hard. Laughter makes it a tad more bearable—and definitely worth bearing. Instead of another grim news show or true-crime audio magazine, next time you hit play on a podcast, opt for some comic relief. It will do the soul good. Indeed, a daily dose of laughter has been shown to produce a laundry list of benefits: It reduces stress, produces endorphins, improves circulation, relaxes muscles, boosts immunity, relieves pain, and decreases feelings of loneliness.

And there are as many comedic varieties to choose from as there are health benefits to be had. Whether you are inclined toward irreverent sci-fi, satirical stand-up, witty banter, or unfiltered interviews, there is a flavor of funny for all.

SmartLess

Each episode, actors Jason Bateman, Sean Hayes, and Will Arnett interview a mystery guest, whose story is revealed through equally humorous and insightful questions.

What a Day

Journalists and comedians Tre’vell Anderson, Priyanka Aribindi, Josie Duffy Rice, and Juanita Tolliver deliver daily news with a satirical twist.

Space: 1969

In this retro sci-fi comedy, Emmy-winning writer Bill Oakley (The Simpsons, Portlandia) ponders an alternate reality in which President John F. Kennedy survived but wasn’t quite himself.

FIRST! With Kareem Rahma

Each episode a different comedian joins host Kareem Rahma to share the story of a person excluded by history who broke through a racial barrier.

Plumbing the Death Star

How would plumbing work on the Death Star? There are in fact dumb questions, and they are the framework of this podcast—but the answers prove surprisingly deep and hysterical.

Latinos Out Loud

A weekly feel-good pod hosted by comedian Rachel La Loca and friends that uplifts with cultural convos, interviews, and news bites.

‍

‍

‍

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by