3 Steps to Become a Better Leader in a Low Trust World

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|April 5, 2023

3 Steps to Become a Better Leader in a Low Trust World

With more possible headwinds on the horizon, how can leaders best inspire their workforce?

Key takeaways

The key ways you can begin building a greater sense of trust amongst your team
The importance of empathetic leaders
The research-backed leadership style that drives employee engagement

Key takeaways

The key ways you can begin building a greater sense of trust amongst your team
The importance of empathetic leaders
The research-backed leadership style that drives employee engagement

Leadership & Professional Development

Help your people exceed their potential, so they can unlock yours

Learn more

Step 2: Increase employee interaction

When your firm is facing headwinds, connecting more frequently with key employees is a must-do, says Lee Esler, Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Practice Leader for Global Technology Markets. Companies with effective communications strategies are reportedly 3.5 times more likely to outperform their peers. Esler suggests in-person meetings where possible, or a phone call as the next best option. “Zoom leadership calls tend to be to a broader audience, so it's one-to-many. But the phone calls that are one-to-one sometimes have a bigger impact,” says Esler. Baltzley stresses that even though authentic communication may not be comfortable, you still have to do it. “The only thing faster than the speed of light is rumors, and people in silence will make things up. So tell the real informed story and give yourself a break,” advises Baltzley.

Step 3: Practice proactive leadership

When you're not sure about a situation, staying inactive often increases feelings of uncertainty in your direct reports, says Baltzley. “You make the best judgment you can so you have more data to make a better call later. So you decide, you accept feedback, you self-correct, you move forward. What you don't do is freeze or check out,” says Baltzey. Proactive leadership is a key component of employee engagement, which, according to a Gallup study, can lead to 21% greater profitability from highly engaged business units.

Esler asserts that one specific way to take action that also builds trust is to give your employees meaningful assignments to work on. “You're showing confidence in your people. Which gives them confidence in you,” says Esler.

If you’re a leader ready to develop the skills to address today’s challenges, or you’re looking to develop other leaders in your organization, learn more about our Leadership Development experiences or contact us today.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Dennis R. Baltzley, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, Global Head of Leadership Development Solutions

Featured Insights

Tariff Toss-Up
6 Signs Leaders Lack AI-Readiness—And How to Fix It
Affordability: It’s a Crisis for Companies, Too
The Great Tariff Decision

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Kornferry2 LD