Healthcare boards: Enabling digital transformation

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|June 2, 2022

Healthcare boards: Enabling digital transformation

The role of boards in a digital transformation journey for health systems is critical to ensure strategic alignment across the organization.

The healthcare board can — and should —lead the digital transformation journey

A well-planned digital transformation increases the value that health systems and hospitals deliver to their patients, employees and other stakeholders. That’s especially true when the board embraces its role in guiding the journey for health systems.

Board members can play a key role in ensuring business and clinical goals align with digital transformation objectives. They can open the door to strategic partnerships and foster innovation. They can put in guardrails to make sure that progress is measurable and sustainable. Perhaps most importantly, they can ensure that the health system keeps people, not technology, at the center of the transformation.

To learn more, refer to the article written by Jena Abernathy and Doug Greenberg, The board's role in digital transformation: Moving past myths and turbocharging the journey.

Healthcare

Enabling people and organizations to exceed potential & transform tomorrow's healthcare ecosystem.

Learn more

The healthcare board can — and should —lead the digital transformation journey

A well-planned digital transformation increases the value that health systems and hospitals deliver to their patients, employees and other stakeholders. That’s especially true when the board embraces its role in guiding the journey for health systems.

Board members can play a key role in ensuring business and clinical goals align with digital transformation objectives. They can open the door to strategic partnerships and foster innovation. They can put in guardrails to make sure that progress is measurable and sustainable. Perhaps most importantly, they can ensure that the health system keeps people, not technology, at the center of the transformation.

To learn more, refer to the article written by Jena Abernathy and Doug Greenberg, The board's role in digital transformation: Moving past myths and turbocharging the journey.

Featured Insights

No-Cost Health Insurance: Arriving or Leaving?
From Not Enough to Too Much, Overnight
Transforming healthcare leadership
Prepare your board to address ESG strategy

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Healthcare

Kornferry2 LD