Why recruiters should sit in on the interview

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Talent Recruitment|April 19, 2023

Why recruiters should sit in on the interview

By sitting in on a job interview, recruiters can gain a better understanding of a client's needs while also ensuring a candidate is the right fit.

Key takeaways

What a recruiter can gain by sitting in on an interview
Why it is valuable for clients to let recruiters into interviews
How a joint effort ensures you find the right candidate

The value of letting a recruiter sit in on an interview

For both hiring managers and job seekers, having your recruiter sit in on a job interview can be highly valuable. At Korn Ferry, we recognize that great talent is the basis for all successful companies. Our primary objective is to help build teams that not only help solve immediate business issues but drive long lasting achievements.

We work with our clients on resource needs and review requirements to make sure that we do our best to understand our clients’ culture and company brand. We identify and recommend specialized professionals to fill their roles. However, some of the best insight can be gained from sitting in on the interview and can be crucial to finding the ideal match for positions, especially in the most skills challenged, competitive and urgent situations.

How does recruiter attendance in an interview benefit the client?

What happens during the actual interview will directly impact whether a person gets hired or not. A client might ask: “Well, what do I get out of it?”

Let's look at the following scenario as an example.

Recently, a client challenged an executive recruiter’s desire to sit in on an interview. Prior to the interview, the recruiter met with the client, giving them a sense of the recruiting process and explained what they could gain by allowing them to sit in on the interview.

First and foremost, sitting in on the interview shows clients a commitment to being a true business partner. By allowing the recruiter to sit in on a job interview (strictly as an observer), you’re giving him or her access to invaluable information, subtle details and clues that may have been hard to convey based on the position description. Recruiters strive to find the exact type of talent that clients are looking for and the best personality type that will fit their company culture. “Sitting in” allows recruiters to gain insight into the more critical aspects of filling this role with the right person.

Further, following the interview, recruiters are able to debrief with the employer immediately afterwards to share observations, pertinent insight and feedback into their own process in order to better understand what went well or what could have been better in the interview process. Ultimately, having the recruiter sit in on the interview will save the client time and assists in finding well-suited talent as well as helping to build a solid, strategic relationship.

Professional Search

Find the right people for the right roles to deliver your strategy

Learn more

Reach out to Korn Ferry for your recruiting needs today

At Korn Ferry, our executive recruiters strive to qualify candidates based on skills, personalities and cultural fits. While recruiters act as career counselors for candidates, often they are the client’s ear to the ground, giving them the latest industry updates. Consider letting your recruiter sit in on the next interview. You can rest assured that you will find the talent you need quickly and efficiently and stay ahead of your competition.

To learn more, contact us today.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Professional Search

Featured Insights

Briefings Podcast: Stop the Fake Compliments
Briefings Podcast: Always the Hire, Never the Fire
Britain’s AI Experiment: Down in Jobs So Far
The Vague Definition of ‘AI Cheating’

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Talent Recruitment

Professional Search

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by