Preparing for the Great Unknown

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|February 23, 2026

Preparing for the Great Unknown

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison has tips for acing both the usual and the unexpected job interview questions.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of I Need a Job!

A penguin walks into the room, wearing a baseball cap and shorts—what do you say?

“Excuse me,” the candidate interrupted. “What kind of penguin? There are like eighteen different species. Emperor, king, chinstrap, macaroni.…” He ticked them off on his fingers. “It makes a difference.”

I nodded. “Let’s just say it was an emperor penguin.”

“Good,” the person replied, not missing a beat. “Because they’re like four feet tall. You could probably get an emperor penguin into shorts and a baseball cap.”

Over the years, when interviewing people, I’ve occasionally thrown in a quirky question. Not every time—but when my instinct tells me, I bring in a mindbender.

Another favorite—how do you make a tuna fish sandwich? Some people stare—unable to figure out why I’d ask such a thing. Others launch into a story about why they toast the bread or wax philosophical about the importance of pickle relish.

Frankly, it’s not about the question, but how engaged we are with it.

Questions will range from the intentionally obscure to the sublime. How many ping-pong balls would fill the room? How many quarters would it take to reach the top of the building? What could you teach someone in less than a minute?

The questions differ, but their purpose is the same: revealing how you think—especially when confronted with the unexpected. By processing and puzzling it out in real time with the interviewer, you’re showcasing engagement, curiosity, and thinking style.

Whether an interview is with a bot or a human, it’s all the same. There’s no need to predict every question in all its permutations. It’s about putting our trust in preparation.

In fact, I received a call this week from someone nervous about an upcoming interview. The issue: the interviewer would be an AI-powered bot—and the person was worried about relating to something that wasn’t human.

“Instead of focusing so much on ‘who,’ try thinking about the ‘what,’” I suggested.

Because the great unknown rewards prepared minds far more than perfect answers.

Now, let’s turn to the expected: the standard fare of predictable questions that are the staple of every interview. They’re likely to be asked, in some form or flavor.

While some may say they’re cliché, let’s remember that interviewers ask them for a reason. They’re listening for signals—how you think, how you behave, what motivates you, how you’re wired …

So, let’s take a closer look.

Tell me about yourself. This one is all about connection. Start with something personal—where you were raised, what makes you unique, why you do what you do. Everyone has a story to tell.

What’s your greatest career accomplishment? The interviewer is looking for results—as well as resilience. Keep it tight—a concise story about overcoming a problem or realizing an opportunity.

What are your strengths? This one is all about self-knowledge. Don’t resort to hyperbole, focus on real accomplishments.

What are your weaknesses? Don’t fall for the trap of the humblebrag disguised as a flaw: “I work too hard.” “I’m a perfectionist.” “I care too much.”Share something you really learned about yourself to illustrate your accountability and willingness to grow and learn.

Why do you want to work here? This is the time to demonstrate the homework you’ve done—and the passion you have for the company.

Do you have any questions for us? Make no mistake: You do need to ask questions. This isn’t merely a formality. Interviewers are looking for your motivation and your ability to discern. Better yet, weave in your questions throughout the interview—and make it a conversation.

Your “TV interview” … So, for each of these questions you just know you’re going to be asked, set a timer for two minutes and bullet out what you want to highlight. Read, reflect, and revise what you’ve written—then video record yourself answering each question. Then do it again… and again. Remember, in a television interview, a person gets about 20 to 40 seconds to make a point. Salient and concise answers—that’s the goal here.

And with every response, remember how you A.C.T. Be Authentic. Make a Connection. Give others a Taste of who you are.

Amid the expected and the unexpected—the quirky questions and the rote—there will always be you. And preparation is our bridge.

Because the great unknown isn’t about the questions. It’s the quest to prepare our minds.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

The Thing About Hope
When Reality Meets Hope

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by