Emotional Intelligence: Why Now?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Emotional Intelligence: Why Now?

A new Korn Ferry paper explores the importance and relevance of Emotional Intelligence.

The world has changed beyond recognition. COVID-19 has upended lives to the point where aspects of day-to-day existence are unrecognizable. Things once taken for granted have become unsettling, stressful, and traumatic. At the same time, other crises continue to escalate around the globe. People are crying out to be listened to and heard—desperately searching for meaning and hope in an uncertain, chaotic world.

Business leaders face an unprecedented array of critical challenges—revamping or even reinventing their businesses in the face of drastically shifting demand; responding agilely to ever-changing restrictions; and making tough decisions that affect people’s livelihoods. On top of this, they must engage a workforce trying to deal with the social, environmental, and economic challenges that have become a part of everyday life.

It’s a perfect storm—a juggling act for leaders focusing on business needs, managing their own emotions, and responding to their people with empathy and inspiration. Everyone needs support—all the way to the top. In a new paper, Emotional Intelligence: Why Now?, the Korn Ferry Institute explores the importance and relevance of the Emotional and Social Competency Inventory (ESCI), a 360-degree feedback tool that helps leaders improve their work, their lives, and their effect on those they interact with. After all, pairing business expertise with Emotional Intelligence is no longer a nice-to-have, but a table stake for leaders. And, as research shows, CEOs differentiate themselves through leading with real humanity, authenticity, and heart, rather than simply with instructions and direction.

Download PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Organization Strategy

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by