Top Teams, Reimagined

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Top Teams, Reimagined

A new Korn Ferry Institute report reveals the changing dynamic among CEOs and their high-performing executive teams.

Interconnected and interdependent.

More and more, the world is seeing its boundaries blur, and last year brought that reality into sharp focus. The COVID-19 outbreak tested economies, supply chains, and global leadership, taxing countries as they worked together to change the course of a pandemic that spared no one.

Without a doubt, the recent crisis has forever changed the world. Now, experts say, to succeed in this new landscape, CEOs and their high-performing executive teams will have to operate ­­­in a new way. “As the role of the CEO has evolved, so too must the mindsets and actions of the executive leadership team to serve the value-creating interests and purpose of the enterprise as a whole,” says Tierney Remick, Vice Chairman and Co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Board & CEO Services practice.

As part of its CEOs for the Future series, the Korn Ferry Institute took a deep dive into what CEOs and theirexecutive leadership teams will need in order to navigate such uncertain and disruptive times. Korn Ferry interviewed more than 100 CEOs and directors in North America and learned more about those mindsets and capabilities now critical to future success. More than anything else, these experts told Korn Ferry, CEOs and their high-performing teams will need to lead the enterprise together, through a holistic lens, and from a collective, interconnected, and interdependent perspective.

For her part, Remick says this trend started emerging within the last few years, but has only accelerated thanks to the events of 2020. Yet, while these societies have become overwhelmed by the crisis, they’re also been lifted by their shared experience. And this, experts say, provides a valuable insight for CEOs and their high-performing executive teams: confronting a common challenge can bring a powerful sense of teamwork and community-building. “The integrative synchrony with which CEOs and their executive leadership teams need to think and lead the business holistically, as one, is not only critical to the world of accelerating change,” Remick says, “but can be truly differentiating in terms of performance.”

Download PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Leadership

Featured Topics

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by