Introducing Personas

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Introducing Personas

Korn Ferry’s new framework offers a simple starting point for describing people.

When determining the right fit, sometimes an occasion calls for a custom-tailored suit, with carefully measured dimensions. Other times, a close estimate—say, a small, medium, or large t-shirt—is easier and more effective for the situation.

Like clothing, personality feedback can come in a carefully measured fit or a more general one. And like sizing, the preferred approach will depend on the purpose. Conventional personality feedback is powerful, but complex. Korn Ferry’s personas, however, offer a simplified view of personality—much like a small, medium, or large t-shirt.

In its latest paper, Korn Ferry’s Personas, the Korn Ferry Institute introduces a new framework of eight personas that gives a simpler alternative to understanding personality. Personas, like other personality typologies, provide broad descriptions with a high level of abstraction, enabling a more manageable, less detailed set of personality insights that people can use to understand themselves and others. Their descriptive power make them well-suited for individual self-awareness and development, as they lay a foundation for deeper and broader feedback on personality in the workplace.

However, personas should not be viewed as an exact or complete description of a person’s personality, and should not be used for talent selection, identification, or comparison purposes. To this end, the paper explains not only the science behind Korn Ferry’s persona development, but also the personas’ intended uses and limitations to ensure they are applied appropriately.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Andrea Deege
Vice-President, Individual IP Development, Korn Ferry Institute

James Lewis
Senior Director and Senior Scientist, Korn Ferry Institute

Sarah Hezlett
Vice President, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Download PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Assessment & Succession

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by