LA28: Ticket Tactics that Matter

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 16, 2026

LA28: Ticket Tactics that Matter

The 2028 Summer Olympics are taking an approach to ticket sales similar to the World Cup's, but are off to a stronger start. Why subtle pricing tactics matter.

‍

Both events are using a dynamic ticket-pricing model. Both events offer premium and luxury ticket packages to enhance the fan experience. Both are partnering with hotels, airlines, and other sponsors to drive travel and tourism-related ticket sales. The only difference is that one is on track to become the largest ticketed event in history, while the other has been generating headlines for not managing to fill stadiums.

In many ways, the organizers of the LA28 Summer Olympics are following the ticketing model of this year’s World Cup—but with some slight tweaks that have drastically improved the results. Whereas high prices and low demand kept many of the World Cup’s opening-round matches from selling out, the first ticket “drop” for LA28 in April sold an Olympic-record four million tickets across 85 countries (a second drop is scheduled for August 10).

To be sure, World Cup organizers FIFA point out that they’ve sold more than six million tickets, and that many empty seats seen on TV screens are due to fans taking breaks. Still, Garrick Yu, co-leader of the Global Sports practice at Korn Ferry, attributes the disparity in initial sales to brand reputation and pricing strategy. The organizers of the World Cup were very open, he says, about “charging North American prices” to maximize ticket profits.

By contrast, LA28 organizers (who declined to comment for this story) are releasing tickets in drops that feature different pricing bands and target different audiences. For instance, the first drop was for local fans living near venues in LA. In total, 14 million LA28 tickets will be made available via lottery over the next two years, with prices ranging from $28 to more than $1,000. “They’re doing a better job of building excitement and fan interest leading up to the games than the World Cup did,” says Noah Glantz, a managing consultant in the Global Sports practice at Korn Ferry. Either way, experts say, there are lessons here for leaders in every industry about the power of small tweaks in pricing approaches.

But no matter how firms are handling pricing, today’s world of AI will inevitably generate criticism. Fans have complained that bots gamed LA28’s lottery system, buying the cheapest tickets and reselling them, at a markup, on the secondary market. High transaction fees have also generated frustration, as has the fact that organizers are holding back the best tickets for the most popular events for VIPs and sponsor packages. Meanwhile, Glantz expects World Cup ticket sales to ramp up as the tournament moves into the knockout, or elimination, rounds. “No one is going to be talking about half-filled stadiums when those matches come around,” he says. To be sure, estimated revenue from ticket and hospitality sales for both LA28 and the World Cup is projected to be between $2.5 billion and $3 billion.

Yu agrees, observing that the World Cup’s approach to ticket sales is more transactional, while LA28’s is more ecosystem oriented. As he sees it, the World Cup is pursuing a more aggressive pricing strategy because it has a finite number of premium matches that will attract “big-country fanbases as well as casual fans.” For LA28, on the other hand, every sport has its own built-in fanbase, and the totality of fans across all those sports creates opportunities to generate revenue from casual Olympics goers. “The Olympics is a cultural event, while the World Cup is still mainly a soccer event,” says Yu. “FIFA isn’t going to sell a ticket to your mother, but the Olympics can.”

Korn Ferry is a Founding Partner and the Official Talent & Organizational Consulting Partner for the LA28 Olympic and Paralympic Games.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Sports Consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Garrick Yu
Co-Lead, Global Sports and Head of Sports Research and Analytics

Noah Glantz
Managing Consultant, Korn Ferry Global Sports Practice

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

LA28

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

Total Rewards

Business Analysis

Korn Ferry Sell