How to Handle a Work Rival

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 16, 2026

How to Handle a Work Rival

Managing competition at work is a struggle for employees who have an office nemesis.

You see it on corporate campuses everywhere: two coworkers warring over resources, talent, or assignments—or all three. And they’re likely in a head-to-head competition for the big job as well. These rivalries are a norm in corporate America, where 62% of employees admit to having an office nemesis, according to a survey of 7,000 workers by employment site Totaljobs. Rivalries are particularly common at companies that have invested in their pipelines, meaning that their up-and-coming talent significantly outnumbers the available top roles.

The question is how to handle the situation. Experts advise that it’s not just about winning. “Your own reputation is at stake over how people perceive your handling of the situation,” says Mark Royal, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. Ideally, the corporate culture encourages healthy rivalry that motivates employees to excel on behalf of the company’s interests. In practice, however, things commonly devolve into infighting, frustration, and, at worst, a toxicity in which coworkers are unable to collaborate and everyone loses—individuals, teams, and the organization itself. Our experts have charted out some better paths, below.

Focus on your own game.

Though running down your rival might seem like the obvious move, it’s not. “Instead, elevate your own game,” says Royal. You want to be so obviously good in your current role that the rivalry is beside the point. This is far preferable to obsessing about how you can position yourself against your rival, or, worse yet, managing your rival’s positioning, both of which can lead to dysfunctional behaviors. “The outcomes are not good for you personally, nor for the organization,” says Royal.

Understand the scoreboard.

Excelling at your role is not synonymous with being perceived as qualified for the big job. What’s crucial is to understand who’s making the decision, and what they’re looking for. What are the traits of previous people who have succeeded? What are the criteria for succession in the organization? Most leaders reward candidates’ “enterprise thinking,” which means hitting your own targets, as well as enabling others—including your rival—to hit theirs.

Consider collaboration.

Is there space for a détente? Handshake agreements—when one party moves up, the other will provide opportunities and good working conditions for the other—are not uncommon. Only the boss can decide who is promoted, but if both rivals are capable of seeing the greater good, a coalition is feasible. This strategy can pay off when it comes time for a promotion.

Even if a promotion isn’t on the line, your bosses are watching how you handle the rivalry. Indeed, conflict management is a highly valuable skill, says Michele Capra, a Korn Ferry senior client partner and vice president in the firm’s Recruitment Process Outsourcing business. “Leaders want to know that they have people who can have confident conversations,” she says.

If you’re not winning, reassess.

Perhaps your rival is playing hardball and you can’t keep up. So don’t. Instead of racing to get ahead, consider slowing down and looking at the situation from a different perspective.  This is a classic martial-arts gambit: Never charge head-on at a stronger or more aggressive opponent. Instead, be receptive to their energy and figure out how to redirect it.

Regardless of the particulars, experts advise devising a Plan B. Having a backup plan not only enables you to land on your feet, but also takes you through a consideration of your goals, likes, and dislikes in future roles. Overall, the opportunity for eggs in multiple baskets “allows for a balanced approach to the situation,” says Royal.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Michele Capra
Senior Client Partner and Vice President, RPO

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

Career Transition & Outplacement

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by