Emotional Intelligence as a Key Lever for Crisis Leadership

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Emotional Intelligence as a Key Lever for Crisis Leadership

Korn Ferry research shows what leaders do to get the best results during challenging times

In dealing with crises like the novel coronavirus pandemic, the ability to listen objectively and compassionately to your counterparts, manage your own reactions and stress, and effectively put together a crisis team will lead to better outcomes—both in the short- and long-term.

In its latest report, Emotional Intelligence as a Key Lever for Crisis Leadership, the Korn Ferry Institute draws from its Behavioral Event Interview databases to see what senior leaders did to get the best results during disruptive, watershed moments. What we’ve found is that those leaders who succeeded in challenging times tapped into more than the usual business acumen and leadership skills.

“Effective crisis leadership depends on empathy, teamwork, and focusing on customers,” says Signe Spencer, client research partner at the Korn Ferry Institute. “Emotional intelligence is the foundation that makes leadership in crisis effective.”

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Leadership & Professional Development

Executive Search

Kornferry2 LD

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by