How Many Titles Are Too Many?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 1, 2026

How Many Titles Are Too Many?

The number of C-suite leaders with two or more titles has more than doubled in the last decade. But experts say the trend isn’t about grooming successors.

What do the chief marketing officer, chief communications officer, and head of corporate affairs all have in common? At some firms, they’re now the same person.

As firms flatten management to reduce bureaucracy and speed decision-making, more C-suite responsibilities are being absorbed by a single executive. Over the last decade, the number of C-suite executives with more than two titles has increased by a staggering 121%, according to new data. Ten percent of that growth has come in the last two years, as firms have reorganized to keep pace with AI transformation. “A lot of responsibilities are flowing up to executive leadership,” says Torrey Foster, a vice chairman in the Board and CEO Services practice and managing partner for North American consumer markets for Korn Ferry.

Such “title stacking,” as the practice is known, partly reflects a job market that is tough at every level of the corporate ladder—as in, the more titles, the better the résumé. But experts say title stacking is also a form of efficiency. As new mandates like heightened cybersecurity and data privacy have been introduced into the C-suite, some firms have opted to assign them to an existing role rather than creating an entirely new one. At the same time, many firms are giving current leaders new titles like chief innovation officer or chief experience officer. More recently, some organizations have sought to unite talent and AI transformation by combining human resources and technology leadership under one executive.

To be sure, title stacking is commonly employed by CEOs and boards to expose potential successors to different parts of the business and test their leadership capabilities. CFOs, for instance, frequently assume COO responsibilities, and vice versa. But experts say other, more worrisome factors are driving the current trend. While adding more titles and responsibilities has historically been seen as a way to groom a successor, doing so could also signal that the firm lacks a deep bench of executive talent. In those instances, Foster says, title stacking “could be interpreted as a missed opportunity to build a stronger bench by recruiting externally.” It could also result in diminishing returns over time, he says. “Each C-suite role is a full-time job,” he points out, “so boards have to ask how much and how well each additional role given to an executive is being done.”

For his part, David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics, sees the trend as evidence of the lack of faith CEOs have in their executive leadership teams overall. “It’s safer and easier for them to just pile responsibilities onto executives they trust,” he says. Dennis Deans, global human resources business partner at Korn Ferry, agrees, saying the pressure to get hiring right exponentially increases the higher up the corporate ladder you go; in an environment of uncertainty and cost containment, he observes, relying on a proven executive makes more business sense. “Leaders can always split the roles back up in the future,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Torrey N. Foster, Jr.
Vice Chairman, Consumer Markets, CEO & Board Services & Managing Partner, North American Consumer Markets

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

People Cost Optimization

Assessment & Succession

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by