You can have a career after sales

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Career Advice|April 19, 2023

You can have a career after sales

Transitioning out of a sales role can be challenging. Learn how you can transfer sales skills to be successful in your new career.

Key takeaways

What questions to ask yourself if you are considering moving away from sales
How to apply your sales skills in other jobs
Which career paths dovetail well with your skills

Sales can be a great job, but people change careers for many reasons. Burnout from the constant pressure of targets and quotas is common. Some people simply want to try something new. Still others desire more structure and a steadier income. Finding a career after sales is possible.

You’re leaving sales, now what?

Transitioning from sales can be psychologically difficult. You may feel that sales is the only thing you know. You might think you will need to take a pay cut. You may believe you’re too old or too far along in sales to try a new direction. Some self-assessment can help you overcome your doubts.

First, ask yourself some questions:

What do I like about sales?
What do I not like about sales?
What inspires me?
What would I do if I had to work in an unhappy job the rest of my life?
As a child, what did I want to be when I grew up?

As you think about looking for a new job, remember that no job is perfect. Each has pros and cons. Perhaps the most difficult aspect of looking to change careers is staying motivated. A job search is a difficult and intimidating undertaking. Draw on your experience as a sales rep to stay positive.

A skills assessment

During your time in sales, you picked up a lot of skills, possibly skills you did not even know you had. Sales calls teach you how to act in a competent and professional manner. To accomplish all your tasks, you need to be organized and self-guided. People skills such as negotiation, relationship building, persuasion and communication are all essential for successful sales. Many of those skills can be applied to other jobs or other industries. An outplacement firm or a career counselor can show you how your skills transfer to another job or industry.

Professional Search

Find the right people for the right roles to deliver your strategy

Learn more

Best careers after sales

When transitioning out of sales and into a new career, networking is key. Tell people about your new goals. Be open and honest about where you have been and where you want to go. Use your friends and colleagues to expand your knowledge of companies and organizations. Read journals, newsletters, blogs and internet sites about industries that interest you. Ask those in your targeted industry for informational interviews.

Here are some career paths that dovetail well with the skills of salespeople:

Marketing Specialist or Research Analyst helps companies determine what sells
Corporate Strategist designs a path towards growth and profitability for companies
Consultant assists organizations through advice, education or guidance in specific areas
Business Owner runs a business in an area they love
Retail Salesperson sells in a retail outlet, which means more structure and no quotas
Sales Operations Manager supports and enables front line sales reps

Finally, consider going back to school. A few classes at night or on weekends will allow you to focus on specific skills.

To learn more, contact us today.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Professional Search

Featured Insights

Briefings Podcast: Stop the Fake Compliments
Briefings Podcast: Always the Hire, Never the Fire
Britain’s AI Experiment: Down in Jobs So Far
The Vague Definition of ‘AI Cheating’

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Career Advice

Professional Search

Sales