Millennials Leading the Workplace of the Future

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Future of Work|February 22, 2023

Millennials Leading the Workplace of the Future

With baby boomers and Gen Xers on the cusp of retirement, how can firms prepare millennials to take the reins in the workplace of the future?

Key takeaways

How focusing on ESG & Sustainability will enable a better workplace for millennials to enter leadership roles
The importance of developing existing talent
How to take advantage of technology to facilitate a purpose-driven workplace

What would it be like if you felt deeply connected to your organization, a sense of total emotional and physical wellbeing, and each day was spent working towards bettering the planet?

That’s the future of work that millennials in the workplace (aged 27-42 in 2023) aspire to today.

Engage millennials in the workplace through ESG

Korn Ferry's latest research on the workplace of the future reveals that 65% of millennial workers would feel more inspired at a company with a good ESG policy. With 54% of millennials considering themselves climate activists, the onus is on soon-to-retire baby boomers (aged 59-77) to think beyond their current agendas and build a compelling leadership pipeline before it’s too late. “We’ve been talking about the baby boomers retiring for the last 20 years. And in some cases, they’ve been blocking the millennials,” says Andrea Walsh, Korn Ferry’s Global ESG and Sustainability Leader.

But what about Gen X? Professionals aged 43-58 would indeed be a logical choice to succeed baby boomers, but the past few years have shifted their priorities, causing nearly half of them to actively consider early retirement. So, the challenge for current leadership is to create a workplace that excites millennials – one that anchors future ways of working around purpose. But for some firms, their internal messaging sounds like greenwashing.

“What companies need to be doing is embedding ESG within the business so it’s not just a standalone policy and millennials feel like real action is being taken,” advises Walsh.

She adds that in addition to understanding what employees would like to see, it’s beneficial for leaders to learn how all stakeholders envision an ideal ESG effort. This includes investors, shareholders, regulators, and outside policymakers. This 360-degree approach turns an emotional commitment into a practical, sustainable one because it intersects with the organization’s business need.

“What companies need to be doing is embedding ESG within the business so it’s not just a standalone policy and millennials feel like real action is being taken.”Andrea Walsh, Global ESG & Sustainability Leader, Korn Ferry

Focus on developing talent

Our experts say one key to embedding ESG strategy is through employee development. Our recent report on the World’s Most Admired Companies reveals that an ability to develop talent is what separates the best organizations from the pack. For millennials in the workplace, that means assessing whether they have the "green skills" required – and if not, investing in upskilling. It also means giving younger talent a vision of what lies ahead.

“When I think about the future of work, I think about creating an experience within an organization that provides a career pathway,” says Megan Jackson, Senior Client Partner at Korn Ferry’s consulting practice.Millennials need exposure within an organization to work on different projects and receive mentorship from the higher-ups. They need to be put in leadership positions to excel in their career paths or firms risk disengagement and drop-off. “The ‘inclusion’ part of DEI also needs attention. It’s about belonging,” says Jackson.

Integrate technology to enable future ways of working

The latest technology can also help bridge ideological divides between generations and put purpose-driven theory into practice. “We now use artificial intelligence to understand people in the flow of their day,” says Alida Al-Saadi, Korn Ferry Senior Client Partner, who specializes in life sciences.

AI embedded in the employee experience analyzes behaviors and actions to anticipate issues and deliver solutions like never before. AI delivers training and information to employees directly. If you need a network, type in what you’re looking for and the AI replies with a list of people who know what you need. Or if you’ve been working more hours this week than last, the AI might suggest you schedule more breaks.

Tech is facilitating what Al-Saadi terms ‘the new age of reciprocity’. She continues by saying, “People are asking for a consumer experience in their work lives.” The era of HR and business leaders pushing agendas down the pipeline is over. Now innovations are bubbling from the bottom up, and younger generations need to know that their needs are being met.

Our time to take control

The future of work in 2023

Learn more

Create a millennial enabled workplace today

The road to the top is paved with good intentions. But millennials have made it clear that intentions are no longer enough to motivate them to continue the climb — companies need to take action. As Al-Saadi says, “People want their impact to matter. ‘I want to be proud of what I’m doing.’”

To learn more about how to inspire millennials in the workplace of the future, download the eBook and watch the webinar, “Workplace of the future: A CHRO's view of the future of work”, to gain further insight into the three key areas our research has identified.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Succession Planning

Leadership & Professional Development

ESG & Sustainability

Featured Insights

Challenging Short-Term Thinking in the Future of Work
The Future of Work: Talent Leaders Take Control
Our time to take control: The future of work in 2023

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Future of Work

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Succession Planning

Leadership & Professional Development

ESG & Sustainability