Because We Love the Music

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|December 18, 2022

Because We Love the Music

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison on why we do what we do.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Take Control: The Career You Want, Where You Want.

The concert hall was packed, and a massive grand piano stood in the spotlight. We gave a thunderous round of applause when the pianist sat down and began to play. Then, halfway through Rachmaninoff’s Third Piano Concerto, this world-famous artist suddenly stopped in the middle, rose to his feet, and announced he simply couldn’t play any longer.

It happened years ago, but I can still remember the stunned silence hanging over that concert hall.

Punctuating this surreal moment, the conductor left the podium and slowly approached the pianist, whispering a few words that nobody heard. After a moment, the pianist gathered himself, then resumed playing with a passion and vigor we had not heard all evening.

Throughout the rest of the concert, one question was on my mind: What did the conductor say to the pianist. Later I learned of his simple but profound words …

“We do it because we love the music.”

That message is a timeless gift to all of us.

For the pianist, it is the music. For the artist, it is the painting. And for all of us, it is remembering why we do what we do.

But the truth is, it’s not always easy. Every year is filled with triumphs and tragedies, successes and setbacks, high notes and low notes. Life is not a continuous reel of someone else’s idyllic social media feed. It’s ours … and it’s real.

And yet thankfully, our human nature often tends to gravitate toward the best of what this time and every moment offer us.

Indeed, may we all keep finding our music.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan
Resolving to Be Resolute in 2026
That Something We Want, Something We Need

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by