The End of 'Bad News' Fridays

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 31, 2017

The End of 'Bad News' Fridays

Announcing bad news on the traditional

If ever there was a good time to announce layoffs, missed earnings, or other bad news, a summer Friday afternoon used to be it. The markets would be closed. Analysts and reporters would be checking out for the weekend. Few would be watching, and the news might be forgotten by Monday morning.

Indeed, while a recent survey by Korn Ferry shows that 47 percent of executives still choose Friday to deliver bad news versus Monday through Thursday, it may no longer make a difference. In today’s 24/7 hyperconnected world, experts say the “when” of things hardly matters—it’s the “how” and “why” that counts. CEOs and business leaders need to be authentic, transparent, and emotionally intelligent when communicating problems, says Kevin Cashman, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “Instead of thinking of timing of a message, think about the depth and quality of the message itself and how it affects all stakeholders,” he says.

It comes down to context. If leaders explain the broader strategy behind an event and anticipate the emotional response—a skill known as resonant leadership—they’re bound to have greater success. In the example of a looming round of layoffs, that might mean acknowledging (not sugar-coating) that the cuts are painful and that the company’s two-year turnaround plan will require courage on the part of employees and investors, says Jane Stevenson, head of Korn Ferry’s global CEO succession practice. In explaining the context, leaders “start to get people engaged around this truth of short-term pain, long-term gain,” she says. According to a recent survey by Korn Ferry, 98 percent of executives claim to be providing this necessary context.

Of course, CEOs are often handed a crisis when they least expect it, and their actions in those situations are even more closely watched. Indeed, mishandling these sorts of situations can be damning to CEOs, whom as a group are already facing increased pressure from activist investors and shorter timelines in which to create value for their companies. But when CEOs get it right, they’re golden.

“Bad news is best if you can stay ahead of it,” says Stevenson. “In today’s real-time world, that is an art form.”

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kevin Cashman
Vice Chairman, CEO & Enterprise Leadership

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by