5 APAC business leaders discuss courageous leadership

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|January 23, 2023

5 APAC business leaders discuss courageous leadership

In a state of global permacrisis, leaders need to take risks in the face of the unknown. That takes courage – a skill that doesn’t always come naturally.

Key takeaways

How to embrace courageous leadership
The importance of taking risks and speaking up, even if it challenges cultural norms
How to bring vulnerability and self-awareness to your leadership style

Key takeaways

How to embrace courageous leadership
The importance of taking risks and speaking up, even if it challenges cultural norms
How to bring vulnerability and self-awareness to your leadership style

Leadership & Professional Development

Help your people exceed their potential, so they can unlock yours

Learn more

4 Playing to win, rather than playing not to lose

It’s not just fear of failure that holds many leaders back from being courageous. It’s the fact that they’ve never lost – something that defines their identity and reputation. Consequently, they prefer to only take risks that they are certain will pay off. Scott Hensarling, Senior Client Partner, Korn Ferry Singapore, calls this “playing not to lose”. “Over 15 years of assessment and coaching, the most common scenario I see isn’t an epic good versus evil choice,” says Hensarling. “It’s the moment where leaders could apply courage and make a strategic bet – or play it safe with a low-risk middle ground.” The problem with playing it safe is that the organization may survive. But it will never thrive. “Courage is the key to generating value, and leadership needs to demonstrate it first.” Scott says.

5 Bringing your whole self to work — and giving others permission to do the same

How can you make the tough but value-aligned decisions that chart a new path forward for your whole organization? You need to be ready to lead difficult conversations, name the elephants in the room, challenge the status quo, and rearrange power structures. Dr. Laura McHale, a Korn Ferry leadership psychologist based in Hong Kong, says this is tough work and it’s natural to feel “a little wobbly and vulnerable.” This vulnerability is scary but necessary for true change and growth. “Bringing your whole self to work is profoundly courageous. It's also inspiring because it gives others permission to do the same,” says Hensarling. “This is the single most complex time in the history of humanity. Getting the best return on courage requires strong self-awareness, as well as the ability to prioritize shared value over ‘value for self’.”

Why a courageous mindset matters: The foundation for an Enterprise Leader

Today’s leaders are expected to transform their organizations while staying true to core principles, to advance social goals without sacrificing economic ones, and to balance employee wellness needs with productivity requirements. These are big, difficult challenges that can’t be met by avoiding conflict, staying quiet or playing it safe. They require a courageous mindset–– one of the five mindsets that form the foundation of a successful Enterprise Leader.

Ready to begin your journey towards Enterprise Leadership and cultivate a more courageous mindset? Talk to us about our Enterprise Leadership Institute.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Emily Szakacs

Client Partner, Leadership Development, Korn Ferry Australia

Hanako Muto

Korn Ferry Client Partner, Japan

Nishith Mohanty

Korn Ferry Partner, India

Featured Insights

Tariff Toss-Up
6 Signs Leaders Lack AI-Readiness—And How to Fix It
Affordability: It’s a Crisis for Companies, Too
The Great Tariff Decision

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Kornferry2 LD