Working with Purpose

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Working with Purpose

The Korn Ferry Institute introduces a new framework that helps people define and clarify their personal purpose.

Personal purpose is what connects your most authentic, true inner selves to the impact you aim to have on the world around you.

Purpose is the meaning you give to what you do—the principles and standards that guide how you live and the choices you make. Over time, your purpose can and most likely will change, as priorities and resources evolve through life and work experiences.

The Korn Ferry Institute finds that purpose resides at the intersection of three components: personal values, mission, and resources. You are purposeful when the three elements are in sync, enabling you to act in ways that are intentional, thoughtful, and deliberate. And when the three align, you can tap into that new source of energy and inner strength that gives rise to hope, resilience, and intrinsic motivation.

In our latest report, Working with Purpose, the Korn Ferry Institute introduces a new conceptual framework of purpose that helps people uncover their own mission and values, and connect these elements to their capabilities. Known as the Korn Ferry Purpose Framework, this new model moves purpose from all-encompassing yet elusive statements to a concrete, research-based definition that allows people to define, clarify, align, and activate their purpose, turning concepts into actual realizations.

After all, if you are clear on your purpose, you are better positioned to navigate and achieve success in an uncertain world. You are better able to manage complexity, tolerate ambiguity, and given today’s crises, cope with stress and rise above challenging times. Personal purpose provides an anchor in a fast-changing environment—a core principle to serve as your North Star.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Guangrong Dai
Senior Director of Research, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Download PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Organization Strategy

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by