Pay Transparency Strategy for Multinational Organizations

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Organizational Transformation|March 25, 2026

Pay Transparency Strategy for Multinational Organizations

How multinational companies can develop pay transparency strategies that meet the unique needs of diverse global markets.

Key takeaways

What multinational organizations should consider when planning to implement pay transparency around the world
Why establishing a set of pay transparency principles helps diverse global stakeholders
How to develop a flexible pay transparency road map that meets the needs of different markets

How Global Companies Can Approach Pay Transparency

Once considered a radical concept, pay transparency—openly sharing employee compensation information—is no longer the novel idea it was a few years ago.

Growing legislation around the world is making pay transparency or pay equity more common, and many organizations are beginning to take baby steps.

“The runway is getting shorter, and the clock is ticking,” says Tom McMullen, a senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “Sitting on your hands forever is becoming less of an option.”

But the real issue is about much more than compliance. Pay transparency is an opportunity to build trust, show respect, and strengthen relationships across your workforce.

While implementing pay transparency is seldom a trouble-free process for any organization, companies with a global workforce face a particularly complicated set of challenges.

Multinationals must develop compensation strategies that allow for the accurate and appropriate disclosure of salaries—but that also fit the unique needs of markets with differing laws, cultural norms, and expectations. What’s legally required in London, for example, might differ from what the law dictates in Los Angeles, Singapore, or Sydney.

There are several factors to consider when establishing pay transparency across your multinational business. Here is a road map you can use to make the journey as smooth and successful as possible.

Understand Your Options

When determining how to develop a global pay transparency strategy, a few general approaches tend to emerge.

One Set of Principles for All Markets

Many companies will develop a single set of principles that apply to all international markets, with a common standard for what, when, and how pay information will be disclosed.

The sheer simplicity of this approach can make it appealing, according to Korn Ferry’s Serkan Sener. You will also likely benefit from a reputational boost if you're an early adopter.

“It can be a way to assert your point of view on pay equity and transparency,” Sener says. “That can quickly become part of your organizational DNA.”

The downside? A one-size-fits-all strategy allows little leeway for local rules and norms. It can also force some branches to open up about pay before they’re ready, which can cause all sorts of headaches.

Market-by-Market, Case-by-Case

Another common approach is more reactive and involves developing strategies for individual markets only when legislative or societal pressures make it necessary to do so.

This case-by-case approach means an organization doesn’t need to devote resources to the matter until it’s required. And then, once it is, companies can tailor a plan to the nuances of the jurisdiction.

Yet, this is no light lift. “It’s incredibly burdensome administratively,” says McMullen. “It’s also confusing to have different policies for different locations.”

Then there’s the matter of reputational and relational risk. If you wait to act until you’re legally required, you run the risk of being perceived as a company that’s behind the times—or, worse, one that has something to hide. Plus, employees could be left feeling that transparency is a box-checking exercise, rather than a genuine commitment to fairness.

Leading Indicator: Think Broad

More than half of the respondents to a Korn Ferry survey of companies in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa (EMEA) say they plan to establish equitable pay arrangements across their entire global organizations. They aren’t stopping at just the EU, whose member countries have begun incorporating the EU Pay Transparency Directive into their laws and will continue to into 2027. These companies recognize that transparency is about trust, not just compliance.

Establish Principles Before Policies

For multinationals, the most practical approach tends to fall somewhere between the two options above.

“Implementing a global pay transparency strategy is much easier if you establish a global set of principles that clearly define your philosophy and approach to the matter,” says McMullen.

These principles can come from answering a few simple questions:

What does our organization mean by pay transparency?
Why do we think pay transparency is a positive thing?
Who will pay transparency benefit?
What are the company’s goals in pursuing it?
What do we need to consider before implementing?

Taking the time to articulate your rationale for each answer will equip your organization with a logical framework rooted in trust and fairness—one that employees can believe in.

“If you put a set of principles in place, it formally establishes your aspirations,” McMullen says. “Even if you’re starting in different places, and even if you have different journeys, you will understand the destination.”

Best Practice: Stress Test Your Principles

C-suite executives sometimes underestimate the practical considerations of implementing pay transparency.

Before you finalize your set of principles, McMullen advises sharing a concise summary with your company’s key HR and compensation leaders in different markets. Their feedback will help you identify gaps and ward off potential issues you might not have considered yet. By engaging leaders early, you also reinforce that transparency is about listening, inclusion, and building mutual trust—not simply top-down compliance.

Prepare Your Organization

Once you’ve established and tested your set of principles, there are two key steps that can prepare your organization to quickly and effectively implement pay transparency when circumstances are right.

Step 1: Analyze Your Markets to Establish Pay Transparency Readiness

Look at existing or expected legislation at provincial, state, city, national, and regional levels to understand what employers are required to do. Then consult local leaders, who can advise on the cultural norms in the area and industry.

Group similar jurisdictions into tiers, based on their general readiness for pay transparency. Then develop general implementation policies for each.

This narrows what could be dozens of individual action plans into a few common processes, which you can then tweak as needed.

“This helps you to approach different tiers where they are,” says McMullen. “It allows you to acknowledge that, even if most markets aspire to be in the same place in a few years, not everyone is there yet.”

Step 2: Prepare Your Organization for Pay Transparency

“When you introduce transparency, it’s like inviting guests into your house,” Sener explains. “You want things tidy and in good shape before you let people in.”

Indeed, there are multiple housekeeping steps required for any successful rollout of pay transparency, including:

Assessing current compensation imbalances
Refining job architecture (that is, defining who gets paid what, and why)
Equipping managers to communicate the rationale behind compensation decisions
Preparing leaders to handle queries from disgruntled employees who’ve just learned that a colleague makes more than they do and feel undervalued

Much of this groundwork can—and should—be done well in advance of any pay transparency launch, Sener says. “These issues are all solvable, but you do need to sort them out first.”

Total Rewards

A great total rewards program is better for business and your employees

Learn more

Begin Now, Benefit Later

Whatever stage your multinational organization is at in its pursuit of pay transparency—and however complex its rollout may seem—fortune is likely to favor firms that tackle the matter proactively and strategically. Because beyond compliance, pay transparency is about building a culture of fairness and respect. The sooner you start, the sooner you can build trust with your workforce.

“Most executives would agree that pay transparency is a good thing to do,” explains McMullen. “Most would also say it’s going to be a painful process to get where they need to be in order to implement pay transparency.”

But that’s no excuse for inaction, he says. “Think of it this way—is it a good idea to put off going to a doctor for screenings or checkups? If you have issues, wouldn’t you want to know what they are and work to make things better?”

When people understand how and why they’re paid, they trust more, perform better, and stay longer. That’s the real value of transparency.

Ready to get going? Watch our on-demand webinar, Turn Pay Transparency Into Trust, to start your multinational organization’s journey to pay transparency today.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Serkan Sener
Senior Client Partner, EMEA Total Rewards Practice Leader

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Total Rewards

Featured Insights

Pay Transparency & Employee Engagement: From Compliance to Connection
Pay Equity Audits: How to Run One and Act on the Results
How to Prepare Managers for Pay Transparency
Pay Transparency: A Progress Checklist for Organizations

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Organizational Transformation

Pay Transparency

Total Rewards

Kornferry6 OS

Kornferry5 PT

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by