Should AI Determine Your Pay?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 16, 2026

Should AI Determine Your Pay?

A surprising two-thirds of job candidates favor firms that use AI instead of humans to determine pay. Why they think machines will be fairer.

It was a question the hiring manager wasn’t expecting, and one that he wasn’t sure how to answer: Had AI determined the amount of the salary offer?

People may worry about AI taking their jobs, but they’re increasingly comfortable allowing the technology to handle a critical part of their work life: pay decisions.. So much so, in fact, that a new survey says two-thirds of job candidates are more likely to accept a job with a firm that uses AI for pay decisions than one that doesn’t. Even more telling, one out of three employees trust AI over their managers to decide compensation, believing the technology to be more objective and transparent in making decisions. “Employees see AI as a way to make pay decisions fairer,” says Tom McMullen, a senior client partner and the leader of the North America Total Rewards practice at Korn Ferry.

McMullen says employees are starting to see AI as a replacement for salary negotiations. They also consider it to be a way to mitigate managerial bias, because it uses large datasets to benchmark performance-related raises, promotions, and pay. That’s especially true for women and other underrepresented groups, who are actually using AI to think through their approach to pay-inequity issues, says Stephen Lams, a senior vice president of data and analytics in the Korn Ferry Institute. “People see AI as a ‘safe space’ to ask questions about pay they might normally not want to discuss with a colleague or manager,” says Lams. On the firm side, more companies are relying on AI-driven pay processes to attract top talent. A recent Korn Ferry survey found that about 50% of organizations either have, or are developing, AI processes for supporting compensation decisions.

Critics warn, however, that trusting AI to determine pay may be a mistake. For starters, AI can only reduce bias in compensation decisions if the data it is trained on is unbiased, says Tanyth Lloyd, global vice president of technology and transformation at Korn Ferry. Employees and job candidates using AI to level the playing field on pay should also be wary, says Daisy Grewal, a director of analytics innovation and automation at Korn Ferry. “AI could end up giving worse or slightly discouraging advice to a woman consulting with it about pay issues versus a man,” she says.

For now, employees and job candidates still want managers and people leaders involved in compensation decisions—but by an increasingly narrow margin. While one-third of employees say AI should decide pay disputes, twice as many, or 66%, would prefer a manager to do so. Moreover, no one wants human beings to be excluded entirely from the pay-determination process. To be sure, only 39% of people are willing to allow AI to decide half of their pay. “The model employees seem to trust the most is one where AI provides the guardrails and managers make the final call when something doesn’t feel right,” says McMullen.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Stephen Lams
Senior Vice President, AI Strategy & Transformation

Tanyth Lloyd
Global Vice President, Technology & Transformation

Daisy Grewal
Director, Analytics Innovation & Automation

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by