2026: The Make-or-Break Year for Careers

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 24, 2026

2026: The Make-or-Break Year for Careers

Recent AI developments suggest a record number of roles will become obsolete—unless workers take some steps—and fast. 'Nothing is safe.'

In a span of just three days earlier this month, fear of AI—in particular, of its potential to drastically alter the career of every white-collar worker—likely hit new highs.

First, in an online essay that was viewed more than 100 million times, a software developer described how recent advancements in AI have made him unnecessary for the performance of the technical aspects of his job. He warned that millions of non-technology workers will have the same experience very soon. “Nothing that can be done on a computer is safe in the medium term,” he wrote. Then the head of Microsoft’s AI division predicted that the booming technology could be capable of doing “most, if not all” of a white-collar worker’s professional tasks within 12 to 18 months.

For all the talk about how AI will benefit organizations most when it’s used to complement, not replace humans, experts worry increasingly that its imminent arrival could make many workers obsolete—if they don’t adjust quickly and significantly. That counsel applies to job seekers, entry-level employees, CEOs, and everyone in between. Indeed, rapid technological advancements lead some experts to believe that the window to remain employed for workers who aren’t AI proficient (especially white-collar workers) will slam shut this year. “This moment is a warning shot,” says Val Olson Armstrong, a Korn Ferry executive coach and associate principal.

It’s not as if people weren’t already worried about exactly this, of course. Indeed, in a November survey, 52% expressed the concern that AI could eventually take over their jobs. Some believe that AI is ready right now, or will be within the next couple of years, to take over much of the work that human beings currently do—and thereby make the skills of tens of millions of workers obsolete.

To be sure, experts say roles that require more hands-on involvement, for instance in healthcare or manufacturing, don’t seem to be at risk for now. But last week’s developments have struck a chord for many—along with the early February releases of multiple new AI models which purport to be able to perform many marketing, sales, and legal functions. The blog post was particularly resonant in the writer’s observation that AI, within a short period of time, had progressed from being unable to do simple math to tackling his complicated projects without human help. “The future of work is here,” says Brian Bloom, Korn Ferry’s senior vice president of global benefits and mobility operations.

Experts say they want to convey this urgent need for AI proficiency to their colleagues. “Learn AI, use it to be more efficient, learn something new with that newfound time, and then share the knowledge with others,” Bloom says. There are many professional pockets where AI is perhaps talked about far more than it is used. A Gallup poll over the summer indicated that only 27% of US workers used AI in their role more than a few times a year—which, if true, suggests many of them will need to level up their skills in extremely short order. “Individuals have to take this very seriously,” says Bryan Ackermann, Korn Ferry’s head of AI strategy and transformation.

Other surveys show that many US workers plan to train themselves to use AI this year, whether it’s to assist them in their current role or to enhance their profile for a new opportunity. Still, Brittney Molitor, a Korn Ferry managing consultant who recruits human-resources professionals, expresses shock that so many candidates aren’t using basic AI tools for their job search, let alone in their current roles. It puts those candidates at a distinct disadvantage, she says. “Start integrating AI tools into your daily work,” she advises.

But experts say this transition is about more than learning to use AI tools efficiently. As more tasks become automated, interpersonal communication and relationship-building likely will matter more, not less, says Anya Weaver, a Korn Ferry principal consultant. AI can accelerate work, but it likely can’t replicate emotional intelligence, trust building, or the ability to navigate complexity with nuance. “Those skills will become even more essential,” she says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s AI in the Workplace capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Brian Bloom
Senior Vice President, Global Benefits & Mobility Operations

Bryan Ackermann
Senior Vice President, Head of AI Strategy & Transformation

Anya Weaver
Principal Consultant

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Sales Performance

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by