International Pay Transparency and Pay Equity Trends: 2025

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Organizational Transformation|March 25, 2026

International Pay Transparency and Pay Equity Trends: 2026

What multinational businesses need to know about legislative, societal, and competitive changes related to pay transparency around the world.

Key takeaways

Snapshots of major pay transparency laws around the world
Why getting ahead of pay equity issues gives you a competitive edge
How pay transparency builds trust and boost performance

Top Trends in Global Pay Transparency

There was a time, not too long ago, when an organization would be considered an outlier for including salary ranges on job descriptions or disclosing gaps in compensation.

Those days are gone. Globally, few movements in the total rewards space are gaining momentum faster than pay transparency.

“Ten years ago, it was an interesting idea and even a little controversial,” says Tom McMullen, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. “But now, people are doing it. There truly has been a global shift of the pendulum.”

Pay transparency is a fast-moving and complex matter for a business to navigate, even in a local context, with evolving legislative, societal, and competitive imperatives to consider. Applied to a global scale, things can get significantly tougher to follow.

The effort is worth it, though. More than just a compliance task, pay transparency is an opportunity to build trust with employees through clarity and consistency.

To help demystify the matter, we asked Korn Ferry experts from around the world to identify key trends in global pay transparency, share how these changes manifest in different markets, and distill what you need to know as you develop your multinational operation’s approach.

TREND: Boom in Pay Transparency Legislation

Several jurisdictions have recently put laws in place that compel companies to disclose compensation information.

The primary purpose of such legislation, says McMullen, is to create a more level playing field for job applicants and to ultimately reduce wage gaps across employee groups at the time of hire.

European Pay Transparency Laws

Europe is leading the charge. Countries across the European Union are moving to implement the EU Pay Transparency Directive—a sweeping piece of legislation requiring employers with at least 100 employees to disclose gender pay gaps and take action to address them. While the original deadline set a common target, several countries have since adjusted their timelines, pushing implementation into different points across 2026 and, in some cases, into 2027.

This affects not only businesses headquartered in EU member states, but also foreign businesses that operate there—including the many UK-headquartered companies that do so. “A lot is changing in the EU space,” says Serkan Sener, Korn Ferry senior client partner. “And it’s happening quickly.”

USA Pay Transparency Laws

In the United States, where employment law is determined at the state level, several jurisdictions have implemented pay transparency legislation, including California, Washington, and New York—and many more are considering it or planning to do so.

In response, several large corporations—including Microsoft, Google, and Citibank—have started sharing salary ranges across all 50 states, both to get ahead of the curve and to spare the administrative burden of managing dozens of different standards.

APAC Pay Transparency Laws

Across the Asia-Pacific (APAC) region, several governments have enacted legislation meant to air out gender discrepancies in pay.

For example, Japan began requiring larger companies to report on their gender pay gap in 2023. And in Australia, the government began publicly sharing gender pay gaps for private-sector businesses with more than 100 employees in 2024, two years after passing a bill that bans pay secrecy.

ROW Pay Transparency Laws

Many other markets are developing their new legislation. While the specifics of these international laws vary, their steady emergence means pay transparency should be on the radar of multinational companies based anywhere.

“It’s an important issue globally,” says McMullen. “Even if you’re headquartered somewhere without legislation, if you’re doing business in places that do—like the US or Europe—then you need to comply.”

PREPARE: Start Thinking Strategy

If your company operates in markets that are developing pay transparency legislation, you’ll need to review the needs of all the constituent operations and form a multinational pay transparency strategy.

By engaging with stakeholders early and clearly communicating your approach, you’ll not only meet compliance expectations but also show employees that fairness and openness are priorities—building trust and ensuring smoother implementation across diverse regions.

TREND: Stakeholders Demand Pay Transparency

Regulatory compliance is the primary reason most companies are investigating pay transparency, but it’s not the only one.

“Societal pressure is a major driving force,” Sener says. “We can clearly see that there’s increasing demand to address fairness in employment across all employee groups, whether it’s related to gender, race, or other dimensions.”

The push comes from multiple sources. “There’s more pressure from employees, job seekers, media, politicians, and interest groups to create a more level playing field and address fairness in employment and pay,” adds Kartikey Singh, a senior client partner at Korn Ferry in Singapore. “Increasing consumer expectations are also adding pressure.”

Regional Variations

Of course, this manifests differently in different locations. In Nordic countries, like Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, for example, people are already extremely comfortable with pay transparency, so expectations are very high.

By contrast, in Middle Eastern jurisdictions, such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, where the culture is generally more reserved, pushes for transparency may be subtler and less intense.

But experts agree that societal interest in making compensation information more public is ticking upward in virtually all markets—even if the trajectory is slower in some places than in others.

PREPARE: Think Beyond HR

Given the range of stakeholder pressures at play, and the nuances of adapting to individual markets, experts say that a company’s multinational pay transparency efforts should be within the purview of all executive leaders.

“It's no longer just an HR issue,” says Sener. “It’s increasingly viewed as a part of corporate responsibility.” When leaders engage on transparency as part of inclusion and fairness, it signals respect for employees and builds stronger cultures.

Engage all executive leaders by aligning pay transparency initiatives with the company's core values and strategic goals.

TREND: Pay Transparency as a Competitive Advantage

At first glance, pay transparency might not seem to offer any obvious benefits to companies. Implementing pay transparency can be complicated, and some people believe it will drive up salaries.

But pay transparency is becoming a competitive advantage, says McMullen. By openly sharing salary range information, you can build trust and loyalty, attract top talent, and promote a more equitable, inclusive workplace.

Pay transparency can support employee engagement, something Korn Ferry associate client partner Claire Field has seen firsthand. “When an employer chooses to be an early adopter and says, ‘Actually, we really value the idea of an inclusive culture,’ we see how that drives employee engagement and performance,” she says.

Preventing Future Corporate Risks

Pay transparency can also help mitigate risk. Around the world, courts of both law and public opinion are souring on companies that hold unfair pay policies.

“In many places, we see that failure to manage equal pay creates risks related to legal challenges, penalties, and direct financial costs,” Sener explains. On top of the financial burden, this can create significant reputational damage. Clear and fair pay communication reduces those risks while giving employees confidence that their employer values them.

Keeping Up with the Competition

Finally, pay transparency can help companies keep up with competitive norms. In several countries, including India and Singapore, stock exchanges require publicly traded firms to report salary information to stay compliant, which primes investors and customers to expect it, which indirectly nudges their local and global competitors to open up, too.

“There’s a ripple effect, which is creating better disclosures and increasing transparency,” says Singh. After all, there isn’t a business in the world that wants to lag behind its rival.

PREPARE: Take Stock

This cocktail of competitive pressures is prompting savvy multinationals to establish the foundation for pay transparency within their organizations—even before they have to do it.

“Many organizations are taking pay equity and transparency audits,” Singh says. “They’re ensuring that employees understand the process of pay decisions in a more transparent manner rather than taking it as managers’ discretion.”

Total Rewards

A great total rewards program is better for business and your employees

Learn more

Seize the Opportunity

While the specific laws, norms, and competitive pressures affecting your organization will vary depending on the markets you serve, you should expect to get partially—if not fully—transparent about your compensation structure in the years to come. Moreover, there is significant opportunity in doing so—this is a chance to move beyond compliance and create a culture of trust and clarity.

Want to explore what pay transparency might look like in your organization? Tune in to our on-demand webinar, Turn Pay Transparency into Trust. ‍

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Serkan Sener
Senior Client Partner, EMEA Total Rewards Practice Leader

Kartikey Singh
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Total Rewards

Featured Insights

Pay Transparency & Employee Engagement: From Compliance to Connection
Pay Equity Audits: How to Run One and Act on the Results
How to Prepare Managers for Pay Transparency
Pay Transparency: A Progress Checklist for Organizations

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Organizational Transformation

Pay Transparency

Total Rewards

Kornferry6 OS

Kornferry5 PT

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by