The Thing About Hope

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|March 30, 2026

The Thing About Hope

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison explains the critical element needed before one can effectively lead others.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of I Need a Job!

“Although you are an optimist… I am not. Maybe that is the thing about hope—the people who least have it are the people who most need it and wish they had it.”

These are the words an executive shared with me just the other day. It’s a sentiment that raises existential questions about the very nature of hope—who offers and receives it, and where can we elevate and embrace it?

Hope is not a noun, but a verb—it’s willpower and purpose, not just a wish. Far more than something we simply feel, hope is what we can help create, especially for those who cannot find it on their own.

This is also the essence of leadership—emotionally and sometimes literally helping everyone—from the optimist and the pessimist to the curious and the cautious—process and progress, from one place to another.

However, in order to lead others—whether it be those who are seeking or those who are merely subsisting—we must first lead the person we see in the mirror. After all, it is virtually impossible to transform a team or an organization without first transforming ourselves.

Along the way, hope is not so much of an end point, it’s the enduring spirit that inspires us to be more for others … as We Reflect, Reset, and Renew.

We Reflect. Is it about you or is it about others? Leadership is not about you, but it starts with you.

We Reset… toward an intentional mindset of service to others.

We Are Renewed. We are never done, but are we committed to always evolving? Hope is our recharge—an infusion of resiliency. It’s not about yesterday or today, it’s about tomorrow.

Hope is not merely a lifeline—it is a life raft. It is tested not only in the extreme, but also in the mundane.

Most of all, it is reflected through grace for others. Maybe that is, indeed, “the thing about hope.” And isn’t that what leadership is all about.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

When Reality Meets Hope
Preparing for the Great Unknown

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by