Unemployed? Blame Remote Work

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 16, 2026

Unemployed? Blame Remote Work

Could remote work be a bigger factor than AI in the severe employment issues recent grads are facing?

‍

‍

‍

You’ve heard the news: Some recent grads are unemployed, and nearly half are underemployed. The culprit is gen AI, because firms are now using bots to do entry-level work like finance analysis and administrivia, and are no longer hiring recent graduates. But that may be only part of the story.

A new report from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York concludes that unemployment among recent grads is mostly due to the prevalence of remote work—and not to the advent of gen AI. The data suggests that a whopping 64% of said unemployment is the result of the fourfold rise in remote work since the pandemic. With so many more remote jobs, managers seem to have stopped hiring recent grads for entry-level roles. “This isn’t an unemployment problem,” says Paul Fogel, sector leader in the Software practice at Korn Ferry. “It’s a gap in management. Managers don’t know how to onboard and develop recent grads.”

Unemployment among recent grads has been ticking upward, and it’s currently hovering at 5.6%, up from 3.9% in October 2022, according to Federal Reserve Bank of New York data. Meanwhile, underemployment for this group is at 41.5%, with many grads forced to take jobs that don’t require a college degree. Researchers found that the upswing in unemployment precedes the widespread use of gen AI, meaning that AI cannot possibly be the culprit—though they do note that “generative AI and other factors may play a more primary role in determining the employment patterns of younger workers going forward.”

The shift toward remote work is not consistent across industries. “In some fields, it’s like remote work never happened,” says Lucy Bosworth, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. Nevertheless, remote work is still much more common than it was pre-pandemic—prevalent enough to cause the bulk of the unemployment bump among recent grads. And this kind of work comes with a notable lack of mentorship and development. At one firm that allowed remote options as part of a work-life balance program, leaders discovered that coaching by senior employees decreased markedly. “Senior people felt that they needed to be head down, and didn’t feel as responsible for coaching,” says Karrin Randle, associate client partner at Korn Ferry, who suggests incorporating time for development into the workday.

Firms are recognizing that the primary benefits of working from home are efficiency and productivity. But the innovation and brainstorming that come when multiple people are together in the same room cannot be replicated remotely. Remote work makes sense chiefly when raw productivity is the goal, says Karena Man, senior client partner in the Technology and Digital practice at Korn Ferry. But when productivity has already been maximized, value creation becomes the aim—and experts say that can occur more effectively in the office. For companies requiring workers coming into the office four to five days per week, it’s “not just a mandate—they’re building corporate culture around it,” she says.

Still, experts say firms may want to consider hiring at least some recent grads for remote work, if only to keep a pool of workers ready for future developments. “It’s not impossible by any stretch,” says Fogel. He argues that while it’s convenient to sit down a new hire and instruct them to watch and learn, setting up a Zoom call and sharing insights can be effective too. “It’s the same training load in any medium,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

Lucy Bosworth
Senior Client Partner

Karrin Randle
Associate Client Partner – Culture, Change & Communication

Karena Man
Senior Client Partner, Technology & Digital Practice, San Francisco, CA

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

AI in the Workplace

AI-Ready Workforce

AI-Ready Organization

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by