5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 13, 2026

5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

The “testing-the-tech” honeymoon period is over: Bosses now expect ingenuity and new workflows using AI.

Sure, it’s easy enough to be one of the 45% of workers who uses AI daily at work for tasks like editing memos or finding statistics or drafting slides. But what about incorporating AI into workflows, in ways that expand productivity and quality—and, you know, changes the game?

That’s a hard ask. And it’s precisely the request that managers are presenting to their teams in 2026. “Employees are left to figure out how to respond to AI mandates,” says Karena Man, senior client partner in the Technology and Digital practice at Korn Ferry. “The dirty secret is that managers are also unsure.” Indeed, getting started is overwhelming for anyone, techie or not. That’s because while many employees are quite comfortable using AI for one-off tasks (such as summarizing or analyzing one thing), managers are now looking for systemic and proactive thinking—which is a new trick for most employees. The only way forward, says Man, is to lean into the novelty of AI and test drive it. Here’s where to start:

Put AI to work as a strategic analyst.

AI is a great partner for strengthening strategies until they’re bomb proof. Challenge assumptions, pressure test logic, identify risks, and question framing. “I find that AI is good for enhancing my judgment quality,” says Man.

Ask AI to identify patterns.

AI is excellent at spotting repetitions. Examples include: In meetings, which topics consistently cause conflict? Who dominates conversations? What are the top five problems behind 1,000 support tickets? Which headlines drive engagement? Which processes are entirely dependent on one person, creating risk concentration?

Use AI to highlight risks.

Post-mortems are so 2023. AI can service a similar purpose—before the project even starts. Give a prompt such as, “Assume this project fails in 6 months. List the most likely reasons and early warning indicators.” “It acts as a pre-mortem,” says Paul Fogel, sector leader in the Professional Search practice at Korn Ferry.

Create transferable procedures with AI.

Sure, you might be using AI effectively, but you can multiply the impact by capturing your work, so that other people on your team can do the same? Think checklists, playbooks, and decision trees for everything from handling challenging customers to crisis management. “You can create repeatable processes for others to follow,” says Fogel.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Karena Man
Senior Client Partner, Technology & Digital Practice, San Francisco, CA

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 26 - Feb 1)
The 90-Day Breakup

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

AI in the Workplace

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by