Resetting 2026 Goals

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 10, 2026

Resetting 2026 Goals

With hiring so tight, more firms may pull back on spreading raises across the board this year.

Remember last December, when everything seemed possible in 2026? Sure: You could pick up a new training certificate, finish that project, and send out some job applications—while logging early miles for that early-summer marathon. And do all of it before the end of January. How are those goals going?

If you’re falling behind on your 2026 resolutions, you’re not alone: Forty-one percent of goal-setters already have some goals dead in the water by the end of January, according to Pew Research. “People tend to be optimistic,” says psychologist Kendra Marion, vice president for global assessment services at Korn Ferry. “When making resolutions, they often fail to grasp the complexity.” The question, of course, is what to do now. Experts say that February is the perfect time to retune. Here’s how:

Embrace the calendar mismatch.

Think about it: Early January is not a good time to launch new goals. It’s dark and cold, and many of us are fighting the hunkering-down urge known as “wintering” (also the topic of a popular book by Katherine May). Later in the season is likely a better time for new initiatives. “February 1st may well be a good day to start,” says business psychologist James Bywater, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

Address the root cause.

Many New Year’s resolutions fail because people haven’t identified the underlying challenges preventing them from addressing, much less achieving, them. For example, why have you not finished that project? Perhaps other commitments are interfering, or you simply don’t have the energy. Recognizing the root cause is critical, says Marion.

Reframe your goal.

A study of 1,066 Swedes and their resolutions found that avoidance goals, like “don’t let emails pile up,” were less successful (47%) than proactive goals (59%), such as “attend ten training sessions” or “acquire three new clients.” Simply put, we’re wired to do things, not not do things.

Break the goal into smaller chunks.

You’ve heard this before—but here’s the pièce de résistance: Attach a realistic timeline to each mini-goal, says Marion. Many goals fail simply because someone thinks they can do something in 10 hours (like writing a chapter) that really takes 100 hours. Timing is, as they say, everything.

Know your ‘why.’

“Figure out the ‘why’ behind the goal,” says Marion. What will achieving this goal provide you? Perhaps you’re seeking less stress, or a useful hiring credential, or a long-awaited accomplishment. Write it down, and post it somewhere visible, to remind yourself why this is important, advises Marion.

Be patient.

Now that you’ve got your new goals in mind for February and beyond, it’s time to be patient. “It’s easy to give up when we don’t see immediate results,” says Marion. Outcomes take time, and for the next while, it’s just a matter of staying the course.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kendra Marion
Vice President, Global Assessment Services

James Bywater
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Feb 16 - Feb 22)
6’1”, Loves Hiking, Seeks Series A Funding

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by