Essentials: A Hiring Market That’s Tough to Master

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 29, 2025

Essentials: A Hiring Market That’s Tough to Master

Why neither candidates nor organizations are particularly happy with this job market.

Job openings are near a five-year low, and more employers are taking their time to make decisions on applicants. Millions of people say they want a different job, but aren’t looking because they’ve heard—or experienced—the horror stories. Even people who’ve been offered a new role may find that their prospective new employer isn’t particularly willing to negotiate salary or benefits.

It’s not so easy for talent professionals, either. They’re being inundated with hundreds, even thousands of applications for a handful of open roles. Plus, the same new technology that should make résumés easier to sort through can also make them easier to, well, embellish. In many cases, managers are under pressure to limit the number of new hires. Indeed, 42% of executives tell Korn Ferry that they expect their total head count to remain about the same in 2026.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry looks at why this market was so frustrating in 2025, and how both candidates and HR pros can best navigate it in the New Year.

The Application Avalanche

Job applications on LinkedIn surged 45 percent, overwhelming firms and frustrating candidates. What’s the solution?

Always the Hire, Never the Fire (and It’s Okay to Be a Little Jealous)

Even in one of the toughest job markets in years, a batch of career darlings is able to leap from one great role to the next. The question is, how?

The Rise of ‘Best and Final’ Pay Offers

In a job market tilted toward employers, more firms are trying to stop salary negotiations before they start. Will that backfire?

Briefings Podcast: The New Era of Job Hiring

Networking has always been critical to landing a job, but recently it’s become much more complicated. We talk to an expert with 3 million LinkedIn followers.

5 Ways to Self-Improve While Unemployed

Job hunters should expect long waits to find a role—and they should use that time to do more than search.

6 Questions to Ask the Job Interviewer

Being curious about a potential employer not only can improve your chances of landing the role, but can also help you decide whether or not to take it.

Click out all the stories in The 2025 Essentials.

Featured Insights

Essentials: AI’s Opportunities and Challenges
Essentials: The C-Suite—and Manager—Squeeze
Essentials: The Job-Hugging Era
Essentials: Getting Ahead, or At Least Not Falling Behind

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Career Advice

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by