From the Bunker to the Boardroom

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|January 21, 2026

From the Bunker to the Boardroom

With economic uncertainty and geopolitical volatility continuing, more boards are looking for directors with military experience.

Key Takeaways

Why boards appreciate directors with military experience
The special skills veterans possess
How directors with crisis experience can excel in the boardroom

Why Boards Want Veterans to Serve

For years, corporate boards have recruited former government officials: a former cabinet secretary here, an ex-agency head there. These directors have been able to navigate policy discussions and, importantly, open doors when needed.

But now, boards aren't just looking for people who know their way around Capitol Hill. They're angling for those who've made decisions, with incomplete information, in bunkers and briefing rooms—those who’ve managed complex operations under pressure. While the percentage of directors with military experience in the S&P 500 has hovered at around 3% to 4%, some experts say this number is likely to rise amid so much economic uncertainty and geopolitical volatility. “Boards are dealing with a different piece of music these days,” says Jane Edison Stevenson, global vice chair of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. “They see a trumpet solo and say, ‘We don’t have a trumpeter.’”

Historically, board recruiters could source talent—former government or military officials with regulatory expertise and Washington connections—from either side of the political aisle. But in today’s uncertain operating environment, boards find they need leaders who can influence global issues and competition, says Tierney Remick, co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. “They need a specific kind of operational expertise that traditional policy experts don't bring,” she says.

The shift comes as national security for US companies has rapidly become focused on economic issues, and some companies, particularly in the energy and defense sectors, are winning more government defense contracts. At the same time, 63% of CEOs and directors say their organization’s risk exposure has jumped in the last year. “Finding ways to shore up supply chains that are too reliant on outside sources is a big theme in boardrooms,” says Claudia Pici Morris, North American CEO and Board Succession Solutions leader at Korn Ferry. “So it makes sense that former military and elected officials are in demand.”

Veterans possess experience in decision-making under pressure, strategic thinking, and crisis management, experts note. Kate Shattuck, a managing partner at Korn Ferry and a US Army veteran, says directors with military backgrounds and corporate experience can “translate very specific experience across sectors.” She adds, "They understand the goal is to serve the collective rather than lead from the front."

Board & CEO Services

Better leaders for a better world

Learn more

To be sure, there’s some concern that veterans may lean into bureaucracy or command structures too much—that they’re not agile or willing to pivot as need be. But experts say the likelihood of that wanes if veterans have developed an understanding of government dynamics from previous corporate experience following their service. Says Stevenson: “When a crisis hits and you need to make decisions quickly, with imperfect information, it can be helpful to have a military mindset around the table.”

Explore more board refreshment strategies.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

Tierney Remick
Vice Chairman,  Co-Leader, Board & CEO Services

Claudia Pici Morris
Senior Client Partner & North American CEO and Board Succession Solutions Leader

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

Featured Insights

Disclosing Board Diversity: Discriminatory or Not?
The 'Climate Change' Director
Board Directors: Staying Virtual
50 Women CEOs Now…and Counting

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Board & CEO Services

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by