It’s Friday: Hello, Anyone There?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 20, 2026

It’s Friday: Hello, Anyone There?

Just 12% of in-office workdays happen on Fridays, representing half the attendance of midweek. Why that’s frustrating leaders.

These days, trying to find a colleague on a Friday varies from a crapshoot to a lost cause. You email. You call. If you’re lucky, you get a response to talk Monday—at 1:30 PM. At least, that’s how many corporate leaders see it, and now attendance figures are backing that up.

Despite the best efforts of companies that want workers in their offices more, Fridays are falling off a cliff in the US. Just 12.4% of in-office visits happen on Fridays, which is approximately half the number seen on Tuesdays (24.3%), Wednesdays (23.7%) and Thursdays (21.8%), according to data from Placer.ai Nationwide Office Building Index. It’s becoming a huge bone of contention and worry for leaders, especially those who found success through working a couple thousand Fridays and issued policies last year for five days in the office. “Top leaders are asking things like, ‘How do I get employees to be butts-in-seats for nine hours, Monday through Friday?’” says Karrin Randle, associate client partner in the Culture, Change and Communication practice at Korn Ferry.

Why aren’t Fridays working? Experts note that low Friday turnout is a symptom of a bigger problem: the failure of many firms to get employees excited by work. Engagement figures from Gallup suggest that just 21% of employees like their jobs, meaning that most would rather not be at work—and by Friday, they’re just looking forward to the weekend, not to heading into the office again. At the same time, employee data consistently suggests that many in-office workers end up spending their days in video meetings. “They’re not getting great connection with colleagues, they aren’t getting quality work done, and they don’t see a point,” says Randle. What’s more, many of those staying home are quick to point out they are still working hard, and sometimes more efficiently.

While the pandemic is commonly identified as the cause of the turn away from Fridays, experts say that it may not be. In the years leading up to the pandemic, workers were already pushing for more flexibility around splitting the day between home and the office, leaving earlier, and yes—working from home. “This was already a trend,” says retail expert Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

As for who can actually be found in the office on Fridays—well, it depends. “It’s really industry by industry,” says Dennis Carey, vice chairman of Korn Ferry. Tech and creative fields are notably more flexible about Fridays, as is retail, where only 11% of firms require five-day in-office schedules, according to a 2025 poll by Korn Ferry. Other industries, like finance, have doubled down on in-office Fridays, often following the norms set by one or two dominant companies. “Once one of those big dominos falls, that’s the way it goes for everyone,” says Carey.

But that leads to a second issue: Enforcing them places managers—the default eyes and ears of attendance—in the difficult position of both insisting on Friday attendance and tracking it. “You’ve got managers spending their time on counting swipes rather than on what their people are actually doing,” says Renee Whalen, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Professional Search practice.

Among firms that are aiming for higher turnout, new efforts are underway to improve in-office engagement. This means scheduling not just meetings, but also events, food, and programming on chosen days. Other firms, though, are taking the more dramatic step of giving up on Fridays altogether. These firms will focus on intense programming and boosting person-to-person engagement from Tuesday through Thursday. “Designing those days in ways that are really valuable, and worth people’s time and energy, might get more returns than making someone come in on Friday,” says Randle.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Karrin Randle
Associate Client Partner – Culture, Change & Communication

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

Dennis Carey
Vice Chairman, Co-Leader, Board Services

Renee Whalen
Senior Client Partner, Market Leader

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 26 - Feb 1)
The 90-Day Breakup

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

Employee Experience

Assessment & Succession

Cultural Transformation

Change Management

Business Transformation

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by