Not Burnout but ‘Boreout’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 8, 2025

Not Burnout but ‘Boreout’

Boredom is starting to rival burnout in terms of its financial cost to firms and employee mental health. Is AI playing a part?

The employee checked his meeting schedule and noticed something odd—it was blank. He asked his manager about taking on another project, but there wasn’t one. Normally a hard worker, the employee tried to fill the day by boning up on his AI skills and pursuing various kinds of training.

Despite hiring freezes, layoffs, and a push from leaders to increase productivity, more workers these days are apparently feeling, perhaps counterintuitively, that they are doing little more than busy work—or, on some days, nothing at all. While boredom at work is nothing new, some observers have coined a term for it, “boreout,” that plays off the burnout issue that has become rampant in the workplace. And according to one recent study, boreout may rival burnout in terms of its financial cost to companies. In particular, the study cites the mental-health toll: Bored employees can cost an average 1,000-worker firm $5 million in lost revenue annually. “Boredom has been running rampant across organizations for decades,” says Jamen Graves, global leader of CEO and enterprise leadership development at Korn Ferry.

Experts say burnout isn’t just the product of normal employee disengagement. With companies facing slowing growth while gaining efficiencies from AI, more workers find themselves with less to do. Indeed, a recent study found that AI was saving them 7.5 hours of work a week, leaving even conscientious types with little do if the pace of business is slow. “Business is tough right now, and the big, interesting, exciting projects aren’t coming in,” says Craig Rowley, a senior client partner who specializes in retail for the Consumer Products practice at Korn Ferry. Economic forecasts project weaker growth over the next few quarters, for instance, and surveys show executives are planning to scale back spending and investments. Due to the pullback in hiring college graduates and entry-level workers, Rowley points out, senior employees are doing more of the routine but boring work.

It wasn’t supposed to be this way. In fact, it was supposed to be the exact opposite—AI promised to take over repetitive, mundane tasks to free people for more interesting, creative, and challenging work. But in some cases at least, AI’s capabilities are advancing so fast that it is absorbing not just the most boring responsibilities, but also the most interesting. “Disengagement is a real risk. People are just going to lose interest in their jobs,” says Purbita Banerjee, senior vice president of product management of Korn Ferry digital and RPO.

Part of the problem is that when employees are faced with so much change and disruption in their jobs, they tend to lean into familiar tasks they know they can do well, says Dennis Deans, global human resources business partner at Korn Ferry. To meet this challenge, Graves says, leaders need to do a better job of connecting employees to more impactful, meaningful, strategic work, as well as demonstrate how partnership with AI can create more engaging tasks for them. “It is a crucial test of leadership to show people how AI can make their jobs more impactful, and thus less boring,” says Graves.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jamen Graves
Global Leader of CEO & Enterprise Leadership Development

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

Purbita Banerjee
Senior Client Partner, Head of Product Development, Korn Ferry Digital & RPO

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Employee Experience

AI in the Workplace

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments