Essentials: AI’s Opportunities and Challenges

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 29, 2025

Essentials: AI’s Opportunities and Challenges

It's potential could be limitless, but right now so is the anxiety it's causing employees and executives.

2025 was the year AI, already a force in business, became an all-encompassing, unignorable technology. Indeed, firms spent billions more on it, and a recent survey finds that seven in ten CEOs plan to keep up their spending 2026.

But as the bill keeps rising, an overwhelming number of leaders have a simple question: When is AI going to fulfill its promise of boosting profits? They feel caught: If they pull back on their spend, they risk falling behind competitors. But how should they use the tech at scale to grow? Meanwhile, AI’s ability to embed in the workplace has created a series of unprecedented disruptions—from cutbacks to intense lessons. Like their leaders, workers feel caught and afraid that if they don’t learn to use the technology, it may take their job.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry’s experts dive into the thorny issues around AI at the ground level, and how leaders can overcome them to make the technology work best for their organizations and people.

The Mind Meld

As AI bursts onto the scene, firms are grappling with how to bring in the missing link: humans.

AI Saves Time: Do You Work More—or Take Fridays Off?

A new study shows AI saves employees an average of 7.5 hours per week. Should firms use it to boost productivity or reduce burnout?

AI ‘Poseurs’: A Hidden Risk

As employees are asked to use AI, some are feeling pressure to fake or exaggerate their skills. But at what cost to firms?

The Executive Ejection Seat

Nearly three-quarters of CEOs worry that AI blunders will lead to their own firings in the next two years.

The AI Roadblock In Our Heads

Best-selling author Dan Goleman explains why, contrary to what some leaders expect, just adding AI into the workplace won’t generate amazing results.

Click out all the stories in The 2025 Essentials.

Featured Insights

Essentials: A Hiring Market That’s Tough to Master
Essentials: The C-Suite—and Manager—Squeeze
Essentials: The Job-Hugging Era
Essentials: Getting Ahead, or At Least Not Falling Behind

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Career Advice

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by