The Boss’s Urge to Create a Crisis

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 12, 2025

The Boss’s Urge to Create a Crisis

Leaders, knowing workers can produce amazing results during a crisis, may be tempted to stir one up. Why ‘crisis creation’ is being debated now.

The manager had read that employees often work best under pressure—not exactly a controversial idea. His next idea, however, was: If no crisis exists to motivate employees, then a boss should create one.

This idea—mentioned recently by a top CEO and covered widely in the media—has spawned an intense debate in corporate-management circles. And it may not go away. Facing increasing pressure to grow their companies or to justify pricey AI budgets, many leaders find themselves wondering if creating a crisis—whether it’s setting early deadlines on a project, or repeatedly shifting plans—could help. They also know it’s a measure that can easily backfire. “I don’t think you need to find more drama,” says Ron Seifert, a Korn Ferry senior client partner and leader of the firm’s North America Workplace Reward and Benefits business.

While crises may be stressful, experts observe, they have a unique way of focusing people on getting things done. During the pandemic, for instance, companies in one sector after another watched their employees rise to the occasion and find ways to produce. These days, however, employees are rarely part of the widespread disruptions businesses are facing. Indeed, with the exception of AI, these may seem like distant matters for anyone outside of the C-suite and boardroom. Some bosses just might be tempted to amp up the intensity at the office. “I think it depends on what you are working on,” says James Stark, a Korn Ferry senior client partner in the company’s Financial Officers and Industrial practices. For decades, he notes, there’s been debate about whether a “burning platform” can help bring about large-scale change.

Critics say that manufacturing a crisis can create confusion about what’s urgent versus what’s important. “When everything is a crisis, nothing is a crisis,” says Andrea Wolf, a Korn Ferry client partner in the firm’s Consumer and Consumer Health practices. Urgent matters tend to be highly visible and often demand immediate attention, while important matters are usually more strategic and long-term, says Marina Ferreira, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice based in São Paulo. During a crisis, the urgent can crowd out the important, Ferreira says, even though the latter may be far more consequential to the company.

Another issue is that employees could suss out that the “crisis” isn’t really existential, but rather, just something the boss made up. “You’re going to break the lines of trust between employees and leaders,” says Shanda Mints, Korn Ferry’s vice president of AI strategy and transformation.

Instead of creating a crisis to motivate employees, experts suggest, leaders should focus more on improving their organization’s employee-value proposition—its combination of culture, expectations, working options, development opportunities, and rewards. What’s more, a boss can communicate high stakes to employees in numerous ways, and without turning the intensity level to 11. One way may be as simple as telling employees that their next competitor is around the corner. That sort of reminder can help motivate employees to reimagine businesses and innovate. At the same time, leaders should have the skills to effectively navigate a real crisis. These include being able to set clear priorities, absorb new information quickly, make decisive calls, and communicate decisions and priorities to stakeholders.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Employee Experience capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

Andrea Wolf
Senior Client Partner, Consumer & Consumer Health Practice

Shanda Mints
VP, AI Strategy & Transformation

Marina Ferreira

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Employee Experience

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by