Five Generations of Doctors Walk Into a Hospital

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Employee Experience|June 11, 2026

Five Generations of Doctors Walk Into a Hospital

Doctors aged 26 to 85 are working under one well-being strategy. That’s the problem.

In a hospital today, an 81-year-old academic physician, a Boomer chief medical officer, a Gen X department chair, a Millennial surgeon, and a Gen Z resident are walking the same halls—and quietly wanting very different things from their employer. The senior physicians want their decades of judgment respected—and to work eight months a year. The mid-careerists want flexibility to manage kids and aging parents and a nap. The younger doctors want a career that leaves space for an actual life.

How can one organization meet the needs of all five generations? Just a decade ago, executives managed four generations. But the number of physicians 70 and over grew by nearly 60% from 2010 to 2020, according to the Federation of State Medical Boards’ physician census, flooding the workforce with a small but vocal fifth generation. When organizations meet all five generations’ needs, retention follows. When they don't, “you see retention problems, dissatisfaction, and burnout," says Lisa Harrison, senior client partner in the healthcare practice at Korn Ferry.

Sure, some doctors are working longer—but that’s only part of the story. Generational expectations are shifting swiftly. “The volume and productivity burden is enormous, and younger generations are raising the red flag at much earlier stages,” says Jennifer Cano, director of the healthcare interim solutions practice at Korn Ferry. “They’re saying, ‘I don’t like this life. It’s too hard.’”

Before organizations can meet physicians’ needs, Cano suggests a reframe: ask doctors not What’s the matter with you? but What matters to you? “You look for what is really going to work well for them,” says Cano. “What's the common theme? What are physicians saying—especially the new ones?”

Different generations may speak different languages, but three themes show up on every generation’s list. "They all want respect," says Kae Robertson, senior client partner in the healthcare practice at Korn Ferry. "They all want flexibility and purpose.” But how those are best delivered—and telegraphed— depends on the generation. “It depends on details like their comfort with digital, and whether or not they want that personal touch.”

Respect, for older generations, is often tied to legacy; for new doctors, it means feeling heard and earning enough to comfortably pay off school loans. Flexibility carries different meanings too. A physician in their mid-seventies might want to go to Palm Beach for the winter; a mother of two might want to be home by 3p.m. Flexible schedules are no longer an optional perk, notes Robertson. "Twenty-somethings expect it,” she says. The fix may include extending flexibility into benefit allocations—if an older physician doesn’t need health insurance but wants more time off, could those be traded?

The leadership pivot is bigger still. “It means not just thinking about productivity, linear careers, and authority-based top-down leadership,” says Harrison. She encourages bidirectional mentorship: pairing experienced executives with newer employees, where the junior partner mentors up on soft skills and digital fluency just as much as the senior one mentors down.

The organizations getting this right are, overall, asking better questions, says Harrison: Do our policies really reflect different career stages?  Are we building leaders and investing in clinicians before they burn out and leave? When an experienced doctor leaves, do they go with dignity—or resentment, and if so, why? Five generations are already mingling at the nurses' station, waiting to answer the right question.

Healthcare

Enabling people and organizations to exceed potential & transform tomorrow's healthcare ecosystem.

Learn more

How We Can Help

Want to learn more about Korn Ferry's Healthcare practice? Check out our Healthcare consulting services.

‍

Our Expert

Our Experts

Lisa Harrison
Senior Client Partner

Kae Robertson
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Culture, Change & Communications

Featured Insights

Executive Takes: Carman Ciervo

Behind the Hires: Kalen Stanton

‍Physicians Aren't Scarce. Flexibility Is.

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Employee Experience

Culture, Change & Communications

Healthcare

Human Resources

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by