It Ain’t Easy Being Cheesy

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 18, 2025

It Ain’t Easy Being Cheesy

New “naked” versions of Cheetos and Doritos, without the iconic orange coloring, will hit stores soon. Why updating any brand carries risks.

Is a Cheeto still a Cheeto without its iconic orange coloring? What makes Doritos different from other chips, if not their signature nacho-cheese sprinkles?

It’s as existential a question as a consumer brand can face, and the parent company of those two globally recognized snacks will soon put it to the test. Starting next month, “naked” versions of Cheetos and Doritos will hit grocery store shelves all over the US. The “reimagined” versions of the snacks are produced without artificial dyes and coloring. It’s the packaged-food business’s response to yet another consumer shift—in this case, to healthier, more natural options. “The 'clean' trend in food has been gaining momentum for years,” says Chris Von Der Ahe, a senior client partner in the Consumer Markets practice at Korn Ferry.

Competition is another factor, Von Der Ahe says, noting that smaller, faster niche competitors have been stealing both shelf space and market share from traditional players. To be sure, it’s a trend playing out in restaurants, fast-casual and quick-service chains, grocery stores, manufacturers, and producers across the food landscape.

But stripping Cheetos and Doritos of their orange coloring could undermine the essence of what makes them special to core consumers, and possibly alienate more customers than it attracts, says Kelly Furstoss, practice director of food and consumer goods at Korn Ferry. “Some people love the experience of having orange fingers,” she says. She points out that people “eat with their eyes” and that the iconic coloring signals something cheesy or spicy to them.

History shows that reimagining or updating legacy brands to address changing habits and tastes has a spotty track record—not just in food, but across industries and categories. Given both snacks’ strong brand reputations and multibillion-dollar revenues, Furstoss says, consumer-insights and brand-marketing teams in other industries will be closely watching for lessons they can apply to their own products and services. “There’s always a risk of losing consumer loyalty when remaking iconic brands,” she says.

Mitigating that risk is part of why classic Cheetos and Doritos aren’t going away. The “naked” versions will be sold alongside the originals. Put another way, instead of going all in on the new products, offering both versions tests the financial impact of the reimagined options on the originals. That’s part of the bell curve of change management facing leaders across all industries right now, says Scott Sette, a senior client partner in the Global Healthcare Services practice at Korn Ferry. “When managing change of any kind,” he says, “it’s about appealing to early adopters, attracting those on the fence, and bringing the naysayers along over time.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Chris Von Der Ahe
Senior Client Partner, Consumer Markets, Managing Partner, Los Angeles

Kelly Furstoss
Practice Director – Food & Consumer Goods

Scott Sette
Sector Leader, Children’s Healthcare

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Agribusiness

Consumer Products

Retail