One Step Forward?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 10, 2026

One Step Forward?

Why companies have become more aggressive both about spending and hiring. 'It's opening up.'

For the most part, the world of business has been in a defensive crouch for most of two years. And there was a good reason, as companies geared up for the costs and impact of AI.

But that was then. While no one can say how long it will last, experts have a spotted a noticeable shift. According to the latest government figures, the nation’s companies added, on average, 180,000 jobs a month over the last three months. The number of job openings has risen 15% in 2026. Plus, US manufacturers are expanding at their fastest clip in five years. “It’s opening up,” says Justin Ripley, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Global Industrial practice.

Experts attribute the change to a variety of reasons. Leaders are enduring the various shocks regularly popping up and shrugging them off. “Once you know you’re not free falling, people make investments,” Ripley says.

The mad scramble to build out AI infrastructure was coming at the expense of other initiatives. But now, more companies are thinking what type of roles and skills will be needed once AI is part of a firm’s everyday workflow. “It’s not broad-based hiring, but you’re seeing companies target specific skill sets, either industry or function-related, to go after,” says Scott Sette, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Global Healthcare Services practice.

Indeed, many organizations wanted to see how much talent they really needed in the AI era. HR leaders didn’t want to hire for open spots if technology was going to soon fill the role. Now, organizations see that they’ll need humans. “HR leaders are saying, ‘I need these roles in the short and medium term,’ says Dennis Deans, Korn Ferry’s vice president of global human resources.

Organizations also seem a little more willing to spend time training and cultivating the talent they already have. Lucy Bosworth, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in talent and transformational programs, says she’s seen a marked uptick in the willingness of firms spending money to develop middle and upper-middle managers. “These firms want to avoid challenges with leadership succession,” she says.

To be sure, it’s not gangbuster growth for most organizations. The average number of jobs being added each month in 2026 is fairly close to the job additions during 2022-2024, a period not known for being robust. Overall GDP hasn’t grown particularly fast recently, increasing at a 1.6% annualized rate in the first quarter of 2026. Plus, it’s taking more than six months, on average, for an unemployed person to find a new job. A lot of the expansion is still revolving around AI (and to a lesser extent, healthcare). If either of those two industries were to falter, the overall growth rates would take a significant hit.

Still, experts say, it’s better to be expanding than contracting. “Money is flowing right now,” Bosworth says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Justin Ripley
Senior Client Partner

Scott Sette
Sector Leader, Children’s Healthcare

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

Lucy Bosworth
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by