The End-of-Year Squeeze on Middle Managers

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 2, 2025

The End-of-Year Squeeze on Middle Managers

Dealt a hard hand, managers are facing year-end projects with 20 to 40 percent more direct reports to supervise. Will the pressure trickle down?

The end of the year often means racing to finish as much as possible, as fast as possible. But this year may be more stressful than usual for one group that had a particularly tough 2025: managers.

According to a Korn Ferry study, 41% of employees said their organizations have created more pressure at the top this year by slashing management layers. Indeed, with all the corporate flattening going on, the number of US managers’ direct reports has increased by anywhere from 20% to 40% since the end of the pandemic, according to one survey. That can cause them to spread the anxiety to staffers or ignore their needs. “Managers are already spread thin,” says Justin Ripley, a Korn Ferry senior client partner in the firm’s Global Industrial practice

The pressure goes well beyond end-of-year projects: Many managers worry about job security. White-collar roles have comprised a substantial portion of layoffs over the past 12 months, and experts don’t expect a rush anytime soon to hire new managers en masse. Most managers already say they are overburdened. Two-thirds report struggling with heavy workloads, and more than half with being burned out. “Given where we are in the global economy, they’re under pressure to push their employees to squeeze whatever they possibly can out of them,” says Dennis Deans, Korn Ferry’s global human resources business partner.

Deans and other experts say that this year might see managers use different tactics. Some will hire interim staff, either to wrap up big projects or to cover for permanent employees on extended holiday leave. Others will dive deep into the data to determine whether specific roadblocks are preventing teams from meeting their end-of-year goals. Part of this means trying to get everyone to use AI tools. “It’s a great time of year to encourage people to use AI to see if it can help push things toward the end of the year,” says Renee Whalen, a senior client partner and North America market leader for Professional Search at Korn Ferry.

While AI can help streamline the process, managers’ success in their year-end push will depend far more on leadership skills than technical acumen. “It still comes down to: How do you motivate your employees to make a final push?” says Kim Waller, a senior client partner in the firm’s Organizational Strategy practice.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Justin Ripley
Senior Client Partner

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

Renee Whalen
Senior Client Partner, Market Leader

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Employee Experience

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by