Essentials: The C-Suite—and Manager—Squeeze

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 29, 2025

Essentials: The C-Suite—and Manager—Squeeze

Leaders up and down the corporate ladder were pushed to do more with less, and faced consequences if they didn't

The biggest leadership story this year had to do less with the C-suite than with the managers reporting to it. Firm after firm targeted managers, whether through cutbacks or by directing them to take on a bigger workload. Indeed, some organizations wiped out entire layers of management, leaving bosses with far fewer direct reports. Meanwhile, the top of the house was hit with so many tech and global disruptions that boards had to rebrand the type of leader they were seeking, leading a record number of CEOs to exit and many others to adopt new approaches. Some have remained, as a Briefings magazine cover story put it, “dazed and confused.”

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry looks at the pressures leaders and managers are enduring, and how they can potentially navigate them.

Dazed and Confused

With so many crises now happening at once, is a new breed of leadership needed?

A Full House of Direct Reports

Some companies now have managers handling at least 20 direct reports. As firms seek to flatten their org charts, are they overburdening bosses?

The Other Turnover in the C-Suite

It’s become a game of musical chairs—but the board doesn’t seem to mind.

Are ‘Rank and Yank’ Performance Reviews Making a Comeback?

Some Silicon Valley firms have turned to a controversial performance-review system that rewards or removes workers based on rankings. Will other firms follow suit?

Is ‘Caring’ for Workers Taking a Back Seat?

A new Korn Ferry survey finds CEOs and directors are deprioritizing skills like emotional intelligence and driving engagement. Why finding AI skills has become so urgent.

Click out all the stories in The 2025 Essentials.

Featured Insights

Essentials: AI’s Opportunities and Challenges
Essentials: A Hiring Market That’s Tough to Master
Essentials: The Job-Hugging Era
Essentials: Getting Ahead, or At Least Not Falling Behind

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Career Advice

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by