Someone Who Knows Somebody Who Knows You

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|January 25, 2026

Someone Who Knows Somebody Who Knows You

Some key thoughts about effective networking, from Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of I Need a Job!

Three months. More than 200 résumés submitted. Five online assessments. Two automated video interviews. No fewer than 150 LinkedIn connection requests made.

And not one opportunity landed.

So went a neighbor-to-neighbor conversation, as a job seeker confided his frustrations. Although they weren’t the best of friends, they were hardly strangers.

In a moment of authenticity and vulnerability, the job seeker shared more than he had in years. “My firm was acquired last year,” he said. “And, well… here I am.”

“You work in finance, right?” the neighbor replied. “So do I.”

And thus began a discussion: Where was he targeting? Who did he know? Who did they both know? And how could these connections, commonalities, and similar backgrounds create his next career move?

Call it coincidence, call it karma—or just good fortune. But this impromptu discovery session was really networking in disguise. The help he needed and the opportunity that awaited were under his nose—and right next door.

It’s a reminder that our world really is flat. Someone we know knows somebody who knows someone who knows us.

Networking has always been important, but today it is paramount—and a warm introduction has never been more imperative.

Every posting attracts hundreds, if not thousands of applicants—and 70% of positions are now being filled internally or by someone who has been referred.

No matter where someone is in their career—whether they are exploring opportunities in their current work environment or searching elsewhere—finding their footing these days takes a lot more purposeful thought and action.

Here are some thoughts to consider when we want to connect—whether to build an internal network or explore another opportunity:

The six degrees of separation. It really does work. Networking begins one-to-one, but it doesn’t end there. It’s Metcalfe’s Law in action—a force multiplier, as the value of our networks expands exponentially with each connection added.

Give unto others. Just-in-time networking is not networking. This is not a transactional event. The essence of networking is reciprocity. Brainstorm ideas. Make introductions. Stay engaged. Forge connections. Show authenticity and genuine interest in others. Even small gestures, when done sincerely, can make a difference in building goodwill over time. Which brings us to the golden rule of networking: It’s not about you.

Networking, not ambushing. Networking poorly is worse than not networking at all. This recalls a story told to me many years ago by someone who, after a workout at the gym, went into the sauna—only to be greeted by someone he didn’t know. “I hear you’re at (company name not included to protect the innocent). I’d like to tell you about myself.” Wrong time, wrong place… wrong approach.

The value of validation. Few things matter more than having someone in your network who will vouch for you. Validation benefits everyone involved: the candidate and the company. This is the fruit of having nurtured your network. When the time comes to ask for help, the warm introduction opens far more doors than casting an empty net. But make no mistake: your performance—far more than being performative—will always be the gateway for getting from here to there.

Networking is a contact sport. It’s relational—and relationships aren’t one-way streets. Think of those old give-a-penny, take-a-penny trays—nothing comes out unless you first put something in.

There is a profound truth at work here: Opportunity still travels the oldest way there is—person-to-person. It’s not who you know, it’s not what you know—it’s getting the people you know to know what you know.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition