Surviving the Monday After

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 4, 2026

Surviving the Monday After

How to function like a pro on the day after the Super Bowl, when $5 billion in lost productivity is expected.

No sleep, no problem, right? On the workday immediately following the Super Bowl, employees typically function on nachos and regret. And they’re just the ones who make it into the office: Due to Super Bowl festivities, a whopping 16% of workers plan to simply stay home on February 9th, according to figures from UKG—much to the chagrin of their non-sports-fan colleagues.

Low productivity is a serious issue for leaders on the day following the big game. Most of them are caught between intense workplace demands, employees who really want to blow off some steam, and their own level of Super Bowl interest. Experts don’t blame revelers, and instead point to a widespread US policy weakness. “In other countries, it’s popular to shut down around a soccer match that’s really big,” says Shanda Mints, vice president of AI strategy and transformation at Korn Ferry. But not in America! As a result, the Monday after the game is filled with the fury of those whose team lost, the glee of those whose team won, the distraction of those who love sharing ad clips, the judgment of those assessing clips of the halftime show, and the quiet rage of the many who just don’t care. Here’s how managers can best manage the day.

Acknowledge the issue now.

Many firms already offer flexibility where possible—for instance, by allowing workers to swap shifts, work later hours, or move around deadlines accordingly. Experts advise managers to reschedule big meetings and challenging tasks, and let game talk happen early and often, especially during the first 20 minutes of morning meetings. “Allow people to bring who they are to work,” says Mints.

Remember that it’s good for business.

Sure, workplace attendance may be low, but Super Bowl Monday is an exceedingly valuable day in many industries: In media and social media, engagement is often through the roof, and in retail, everyone from Bad Bunny fans to aspirin purchasers keeps the tills ringing. Meanwhile, grocery stores are busily restocking after the second-biggest food-consumption day after Thanksgiving.

Consider working remotely.

You’ll be in good company: An estimated 26.2 million workers plan to be at home recovering, according to the annual UKG Super Bowl Fever Absenteeism Survey. At least you’ll be productive. “The fact that folks can work from home in many cases curtails what you see in the office,” says Dennis Deans, global human resources business partner at Korn Ferry.

Get in the spirit.

Perhaps this is the year to relax and enjoy the high spirits. Who among us doesn’t need to blow off some steam? “There’s a lot of tumult in the world,” says Kate Shattuck, managing partner at Korn Ferry. “Let ‘em have a good time. Show some grace.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Shanda Mints
VP, AI Strategy & Transformation

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Feb 2 - Feb 8)
This Week in Leadership (Feb 2- Feb 8)

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by