Preventative Healthcare, Better Late Than Never

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 8, 2025

Preventative Healthcare, Better Late Than Never

Ninety percent of healthcare executives predict a shift from reactive to proactive care delivery. What’s held it up?

In the healthcare industry, the idea has been around for years, if not decades: Rather than treating people only after they’ve become ill, doctors and hospitals need to offer proactive preventative care to the healthy and mildly sick. And for just as long, the adoption of this idea has been hobbling along as slowly as an infirm patient.

The winds may be changing. In a survey by healthcare advisory Chartis, some 90% of healthcare executives now say that healthcare, to remain viable, needs to shift from reactive to proactive care delivery in the next five years. “It’s a massive shift,” says Maneesh Dube, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “Current modern medicine comes into play only when something goes wrong”—which is expensive, unpleasant for the patient, and often avoidable.

Preventative medicine dates back to the 1950s, as a marriage of illness prevention and public health. The concept of avoiding illness by nipping it in the bud was there from the beginning, but the resources were not. The latest shift comes thanks to an alignment of factors, including the data revolution: Data-gathering technologies like sensors and wearable devices have been widely collecting physiological data for over a decade. And whereas in previous eras, each researcher or business or organization had its own data, today consortiums are collating reams of data into single sources across hospitals, medical businesses, government agencies, and universities. “If you are a scientist, you can lay your hands on mountains of data that were not there before,” says Dube. And, of course, newly available AI can detect patterns in the data that were previously invisible to researchers. “If only humans are looking, it’s impossible to find some of these insights,” says Dube.

To be sure, healthcare-delivery models aren’t yet where they need to be. Healthcare systems are heavily regulated, and their central function is still to provide care to customers whose health is failing. “We have a very complex, bureaucratic, and difficult operating model,” says Doug Greenberg, North American market leader for healthcare at Korn Ferry. Before the model can change, operational improvements, partially driven by AI advancements, need to be the immediate focus, he says.

With that in mind, healthcare firms are searching widely for executives with real-world experience in new technologies, with the intention of embedding them in their organizations. In the meantime, some healthcare systems are already branding themselves to consumers as hubs of proactive care and preventative medicine. Yet many power brokers and institutions—ranging from insurance companies to governments to consumers—would like to see healthcare costs drop.

The question for healthcare companies is who will own the customer experience. Anyone who has recently used a healthcare tracking app for sleep, exercise, or diet has likely discovered a dashboard for health-related data that goes far beyond these metrics; platforms for clinicians are similarly broad. Thousands of companies are tossing in their hats in the ring, hoping to be ground zero for patient data in the future. The goal is deceptively simple, says Dube. “From the moment a baby is born, they want to tell the baby, ‘When you’re 76, you’re likely to have blood cancer—so you need take these preventative actions when you’re 21.’”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Maneesh Dube
Senior Client Partner

Doug Greenberg
North America Market Leader, Healthcare Global Sector Leader, Healthcare Technology & Services Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Future of Work

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Organization Strategy

Healthcare

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by