If Only We Knew

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|November 23, 2025

If Only We Knew

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison reminds leaders—and everyone else—to express their gratitude to others.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

My eyes misted as I gave him a final hug. Yet as I left there were no regrets. Only gratitude for one more story, one last good-bye….

I’ll never forget when I got that call a few years ago. As soon as I heard my cousin’s voice, there was no mistaking her meaning. Immediately, I booked a flight to Kansas to see my uncle—just one last time.

When I arrived at the nursing home, the sight of him caught my breath. My uncle, one of the strongest people I’d ever known, had become so frail. But there he was—still smiling at me.

Sitting in that quiet, sterile room, the last thing I wanted to do was break down in front of him. He knew and I knew—but we let it be the unspoken truth.

That day gave me something I’ve carried ever since—the realization that regret and gratitude are two sides of the same coin. On one side are all the words left unspoken. On the other are all the opportunities to say what needs to be said.

In every moment we have a choice.

The colleague who feels isolated and unrecognized…. If only we knew.

The co-worker who is burdened by a loss, a diagnosis, a life-changing event…. If only we knew.

That someone who hides suffering, yet somehow always has a cheerful smile…. If only we knew.

Or even the person who’s just simply having a bad day…. If only we knew.

And all those joyful milestones of weddings, births, anniversaries, and celebrations of special moments for people around us…. If only we knew.

Instinctively, we probably do know.

For families, loved ones, and friends—from those celebrating the Thanksgiving holiday to those in the workplace and all who lead others—an attitude of gratitude starts with two small but extremely powerful words: thank you. Or, said in different ways, I believe in you. I see you. I value you. You matter; you make a difference.

Indeed, that’s why grace and gratitude are two of life’s most precious gifts.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by