M&A in 2025: ‘The Light Turned Green’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 22, 2025

M&A in 2025: ‘The Light Turned Green’

AI caught all the attention for creating disruptions, but M&A activity had a near-record year that caused mayhem for firms and employees. Will it continue in 2026?

It would take some doing for the mergers-and-acquisitions market of 2026 to match its 2025 performance. Actually, it would take a lot.

After starting 2025 in the doldrums, M&A activity went on a scorching run, both in the US and globally, in the second half of the year. Driven by megadeals and strategic buyers, global M&A totaled $4.8 trillion, the second-biggest annual figure on record and a stunning 41% increase over 2024. There were 70 deals worth $10 billion or more, nearly two dozen of them in the fourth quarter alone. Entertainment, technology, telecommunications, and energy firms ranked among the buyers in the year’s 10 biggest acquisitions. “Once the light turned green”—meaning lower interest rates, increased likelihood of regulatory approval, and other factors—“acquisitions took off,” says Torrey Foster, managing partner for the Consumer Markets practice in North America for Korn Ferry.

A friendlier regulatory environment, combined with lower interest rates and firms struggling to find revenue growth from just about any source, explains some of the jump. But while the world focused on how AI was disrupting business, the flurry of mergers forced massive shifts, both at the top of house leadership and among workers, that rarely made headlines. Much of that turmoil will trickle into the New Year as firms complete merger processes. Meanwhile, experts say to expect a new partner, one with an ability to jolt business, to join the merger mania: private equity. “There’s a lot of private capital that has been sidelined because of the high cost of debt,” says Justin Ripley, a senior client partner in the Global Industrial practice at Korn Ferry.

Indeed, half of private-equity investors in a recent survey cited exiting portfolio companies as their top priority over the next six months—and mergers are the path to take. Stephanie Davis, a senior client partner for the Private Equity and Technology practices at Korn Ferry, says firms are gearing up to meet investors’ expectations. “There have been a lot of requests for short-term CEOs who can come in for 18 to 24 months to help get a portfolio company ready for sale,” she says. Davis also expects a lot of PE activity in 2026, in part due to firms’ need to distribute returns to investors in earlier funds in order to raise additional capital from them for new ones.

To be sure, with purchase prices in the tens of billions of dollars, raising capital and limiting the amount of debt needed for an acquisition is getting harder and harder. That’s where foreign investors and sovereign-wealth funds come into play. Last year, foreign investors were involved in 99 deals valued at $145 billion—both record highs by a wide margin. In 2024, for instance, sovereign funds participated in 62 deals valued at $43 billion.

Foreign funds investing in US companies is nothing new, and in most cases, their participation is limited to a minority stake. Foreign funds also must give up governance rights like board seats to avoid regulatory issues. What’s different now is that these funds are branching out from entertainment, sports, and other “glamorous” industries and into steel, energy, and real estate. Or, as Foster puts it, “They are a big part of the equation that has been more active in driving the overall market.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Torrey N. Foster, Jr.
Vice Chairman, Consumer Markets, CEO & Board Services & Managing Partner, North American Consumer Markets

Justin Ripley
Senior Client Partner

Stephanie Davis
Senior Client Partner, Private Equity/Technology Leader, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Employee Experience

Upskilling & Reskilling

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Manufacturing

Consumer Products

Corporate & Investment Banking

Financial Services

Private Equity

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by