That Something We Want, Something We Need

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|December 22, 2025

That Something We Want, Something We Need

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison reflects on the lessons of the holiday season.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

Something you want, something you need, something to wear, something to read….

It’s a simple holiday rhyme—but one that crystallizes and contextualizes a perspective for the season.

Because this time of year is also—and always—a tale of two realities. A real dichotomy.

There are homes filled with laughter and warmth, favorite foods and familiar traditions—and there are quiet rooms where someone feels the absence of that voice they miss.

There are sparkling lights and festive gatherings—and there are long nights, disenchanted hearts, and burdens carried silently.

There are gifts received, presents carefully wrapped—and there are empty chairs, unspoken words, and moments that pass too slowly.

There is celebration—and there is searching.

There is gratitude—and there is grief.

To appreciate the light, we must first recognize the darkness it pushes against. The brightness means so much more because of the shadows it overcomes.

Every year is filled with triumphs and tragedies, successes and setbacks, high notes and low notes. Life is not a continuous reel of someone else’s idyllic social media feed. It’s ours—and it’s real.

Yes, now is a time of joy, hope, and belief. But it’s also a season of understanding, reconciliation, mercy, grace, and reflection—one that reminds us of compassion, connection, and the importance of reaching out with our shared humanity.

And thankfully, especially during this season, our human nature tends to gravitate toward the best of what this year and every year offers.

We’ve all had the experience of giving someone a gift and waiting for the wrapping paper to be removed, the box opened. Nervous and a little uncertain—and sometimes, just to hedge our bets, we whisper when no one’s listening, “There’s a gift receipt at the bottom if you want to take it back.”

Not so with the gift of pure, unadulterated appreciation, empathy, and understanding. There are no receipts, no strings attached. There is no layaway for some future obligation. It’s unconditional.

Indeed, this is the gift for everyone—that something we want, that something we need. The one that never gets returned.

May this season give you moments of time to reflect, light to cherish, and the warmth of connection with all you hold dear.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by