Afraid to Ask for a Raise? Join the Club.

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 18, 2025

Afraid to Ask for a Raise? Join the Club.

Some 66% of employees won’t ask for raises this year. What can they—and their leaders—do instead?

When the job market was better, employees were bolder. But these days, many apparently feel that the one surefire way to rock the boat is to ask for a raise.

According to a report by career advisor Zety, 66% of employees say they won’t be asking for raises this year. Of those surveyed, about four in ten said they hadn’t received a “meaningful” raise in more than two years; half of them acknowledged they were just glad to have a job in this economy. “People are fearful for their jobs and don’t want to rock the boat,” says Cheryl D’Cruz-Young, senior client partner in the Sustainability and Global Energy practices at Korn Ferry.

The data is only the latest indication that many workers these days (including 36% in the survey) feel stuck. It also aligns with the recent trend of workers “job hugging,” or not leaving roles when they would prefer to. From a leadership perspective, experts say such issues can be damaging to productivity overall; they also note that without big raises, top performers crucial in this age of AI could bolt. But for the vast majority of workers, the daily headlines—the layoffs, the long waits to find jobs—have caused fear to edge out ambition. “In a very tough job market where staff hours are getting cut, I don’t know that I’d want to raise my hand,” says compensation expert Tom McMullen, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, most large companies have an annual pay-review process. This typically involves designating a standard annual pay increase (next year it will be a median of 3.5%, according to Korn Ferry figures) and a boss sitting down with individual employees to discuss their performance and whether they’ve earned a raise. This year, about half of large organizations will provide pay raises to at least 95% of employees, according to Korn Ferry data. But approximately 45% of the workforce is employed by small businesses, which often do not have automatic pay reviews—meaning that employees who want more dough will need to pipe up and ask the boss.

An employee’s decision to ask—or not—should hinge on both corporate and individual performance, experts say. In the survey, 45% of employees said they deserved raises between 4% and 6%, while fully one-third thought 7% to 10% was ‘”fair.” Experts suggest that individual high performers seek raises in most cases, especially if they’re adept with AI. “People who know their value will continue to ask,” says D’Cruz-Young. At the same time, the company’s fortunes matter too. At the many firms that have been rocked by tariffs and changing consumer-spending patterns, managers are in no mood to boost salaries.

For firms that can’t afford raises this year, experts advise exploring other types of rewards. While employees especially appreciate comprehensive health benefits—perennially a top employee priority in benefit surveys—other perks are nearly free for the company, such as development rewards like key assignments and access to projects or people, says Ron Seifert, North America workforce reward and benefits leader at Korn Ferry: “Even in this economic environment, it’s not just about pay.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Cheryl D’Cruz-Young
Senior Client Partner, Sustainability & Global Energy

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

Career Advice

Korn Ferry Pay

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Total Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by