Boomers Bypassed?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 2, 2026

Boomers Bypassed?

Despite more baby boomers wanting to find new jobs later in life, the average age for new hires—now at 42—is only creeping up.

Like most people in his department, Jim feels stuck. Like them, he’s looking for another job, but with the market the way it is, he knows it’s a long shot. And with each passing day, his fear of being laid off grows, as does theirs. The only difference is that Jim is 50, two decades older than most of his colleagues.

On the surface, older workers appear to have some advantages in the current hiring market. People age 55 and over account for the fastest-growing demographic in the labor force, while unemployment among people age 25 and under is around 10%. But older workers who find themselves unemployed or want to switch jobs seem to be worse off. A new study shows that the average age for new hires last year was 42.5, just two years older than it was at the start of 2016. Even more telling: Most of the growth is attributable, as the report notes, to “aging within occupations, [with] shifts between occupations contributing very little.”

Or, as Flo Falayi, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Executive Development practice puts it, “Older workers are staying employed longer, but not being hired at the same rate.” Meanwhile, the US has nearly seven million 55-year-olds. “Hiring behavior is lagging behind demographic reality,” says Falayi. Numerous studies show that older workers face longer periods of unemployment and, if they do find work, often end up taking positions with lower pay or status.

Experts say the outlook is likely to get worse before it gets better. Studies predict AI will transform 30 million jobs by 2031, when the oldest millennials (currently the largest group in the workforce) turn 50. “As each year passes, and skills requirements change, older workers feel their job prospects diminish,” says David Ellis, a senior vice president of talent transformation at Korn Ferry.

It’s no secret that firms, while avoiding discrimination laws, value youth over experience. As companies continue slashing management layers, the years of experience required for jobs falls, as does the pay, says Dennis Deans, global human resources business partner at Korn Ferry. “It’s about matching the requirement,” he says. “A role that needs five years of experience doesn’t need someone with 20 years.” Kim Waller, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy practice, says firms do look to develop and retain candidates with “longer runways,” all things being equal.

AI, meanwhile, seems to be mixed blessing for older workers. Some managers may think an older worker will be slow to learn the new technology. But Ellis points out that AI will redefine business in a way that is new to younger and older workers alike. He argues that firms should hire younger digital natives adept with the technology, as well as older workers with human skills, like judgment, formed through experience, empathy, and problem-solving. Data already bears that out: According to the study, people-facing, service-related roles like sales, service operations, and brand manager experienced the largest increase in average age.

Falayi agrees, saying success in the AI age depends more than ever on matching the right talent to the right role. Or as he sees it, “A two-year rise in the average age of new hires reflects lagging practices, not meaningful progress.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Flo Falayi
Senior Client Partner, Advisory Practice

David Ellis, PhD
Senior Vice President, Talent Transformation

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Feb 2 - Feb 8)
This Week in Leadership (Feb 2- Feb 8)

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

Employee Experience

Assessment & Succession

Cultural Transformation

Change Management

Business Transformation

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation