Are UK CEOs ‘Job Hugging’ Now Too?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 16, 2025

Are UK CEOs ‘Job Hugging’ Now Too?

The number of CEOs quitting FTSE 100 companies dropped to its lowest level in four years.

It’s been all the rage across the pond: CEOs are exiting at record levels. A similar exodus in the UK appears to be over.

For CEOs of companies in the FTSE 100 index of the UK’s largest stocks, turnover hit a four-year low of just 7% over the first nine months of 2025. It was the continuation of a slowdown that started last year, with the country’s firms focused increasingly on leadership stability. “There is just more reluctance to rapid change in the UK versus the US,” says Dominic Schofield, Korn Ferry’s chair of board and CEO services for the UK.

At public companies, some level of CEO turnover is normal. Over the five years through September, more than half of FTSE 100 companies (53) have seen their CEOs leave. Slow growth and post-pandemic burnout have led to a wave of voluntary and involuntary departures. “It’s probably a good thing they were moved on,” says Olivier Boulard, Korn Ferry senior client partner for board and CEO services. “When the board needs to replace the CEO, they do.”

Boulard says that economic uncertainty—over everything from tariffs to AI—likely factors into firms’ retention of their leaders. And leaders themselves want to stay or job hug until the climate improves. “If you had to choose today, you’d be more likely than not to keep the CEO,” he says. It’s a strikingly different approach from that of boards in the US, which are pulling the trigger more, or pressuring leaders to retire or leave once the business environment has shifted. “There are more activist investors in America, and the board will back them,” Schofield says. “Then they get a new CEO.” A “fire at will” practice has long been part of US business culture at all levels.

Experts also believe that UK firms are paying more attention to planned successions. Critics have said UK business may be slow to change, for instance, in recognizing the power of AI opportunities. As Schofield sees it, “There is just more reluctance to rapid change.” But he adds that UK corporate governance has improved. “We do beat ourselves up a bit, but there are some things we do well and that includes balanced corporate governance,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Board and CEO Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Dominic Schofield
Chair, Board & CEO Services, UK

Olivier Boulard
Senior Client Partner, Board & CEO Services

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

Korn Ferry Pay

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by