5 Ways Uncertainty Can Boost Careers

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 27, 2026

5 Ways Uncertainty Can Boost Careers

Despite the disruptions, employees can excel in times of geopolitical and economic uncertainty.

Well, that didn’t take long. Less than a month into the New Year, and a return to stability already looks like a long shot. Instead, thanks to escalating geopolitical tensions and other factors, uncertainty has crept back into the business landscape. For employees, uncertainty can feel like a roadblock, says Molly Morrone, a project director in the Recruitment Process Outsourcing practice at Korn Ferry. That’s part of why many of them are still hanging onto jobs they’re unsatisfied with.

But uncertainty doesn’t have to equal stagnation. Morrone says periods of change like the current one “create space for innovation and growth that employees can turn to their advantage.” We asked our experts for their advice on how to do that. Here’s what they said:

Tap into your entrepreneurial skills.

When things are in flux, rules and expectations sometimes loosen, says Jennifer Zamora, a Korn Ferry senior principal. Tap into your entrepreneurial skills and find project bottlenecks or organizational hurdles to solve. Sometimes spotting an emerging need can lead you to a new role or assignment. “Shifting the mindset from ‘I don’t know what’s happening’ to ‘I have more room to shape what happens next’ is powerful,” says Zamora.

Innovate in small ways.

In the same vein, now would be a great time to experiment with AI or other tools that boost efficiency, says Roger Philby, global leader of Korn Ferry's People Strategy and Performance practice. Leaders are more open to ideas in uncertain times, and employees who can quickly test ideas to improve processes or operations can leverage that to their advantage, he says. “Uncertainty lowers the cost of trying,” says Philby.

Get energized, not paralyzed.

Uncertainty tends to sap people of motivation: They wait for clarity to arrive before making any moves. Or as Philby puts it, “Uncertainty can make people feel stuck.” But what leaders want in such times are people who are “willing to step into ambiguity,” he notes. Employees with energy and inspiration can increase their visibility. In unstable environments, Philby says, attitude is almost as important as execution.

Strengthen your influencing skills.

When direction isn’t clear, people who can align and rally others can help bring clarity, says Zamora. She says employees who focus on refining communication, decision-making, and even pandemic-era skills like empathy can become informal leaders in uncertain environments. “Influence is as valuable as expertise,” says Zamora, “and employees who take time to learn and practice new leadership behaviors can accelerate their growth.”

Pivot to priorities.

Managing through uncertainty, especially when it involves massive technological change or macroeconomic instability, often means shifting business priorities or strategic direction. That can include everything from changes in budgeting to business-model pivots to the removal of leadership. Stay attuned to these shifts, say experts; while helping to address the firm’s evolving priorities, you can stand out by proactively pivoting your work and the opportunities you seek.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jennifer Zamora
Senior Principal

Roger Philby
Global Lead, People Strategy & Performance Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Feb 2 - Feb 8)
This Week in Leadership (Feb 2- Feb 8)

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

AI in the Workplace

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career