Resolving to Be Resolute in 2026

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|January 5, 2026

Resolving to Be Resolute in 2026

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison lays out goals leaders should consider for the new year.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

What do we see? That is the question as we open the first page of the first month of the calendar year.

Call them reflections or even resolutions. But they are the sentiments that signal how we can be resolute and resolve for what will come our way in 2026.

Leading by design rather than default is a choice.

Resolution or Resolve. Reactive or Reflective. What’s wrong with what’s right or what’s right in what’s wrong.

What we perceive is how we lead.

Our research shows that up to 70% of an organization’s culture and climate can be determined simply by leadership style. So, we ask ourselves: What reality do we perceive and, more importantly, what will we project?

While we can’t always change our circumstances, we can absolutely change our thoughts.

Neuroscience tells us that what we feed our minds can be just as important as the diet for our bodies. It’s all about what we choose – positive or negative, consciously or unconsciously. And sometimes in the most profound ways. Grit versus grace. Ego or everyone. Ecosystems and silos or the enterprise.

Leadership is inspiring others to believe and enabling that belief to become reality.

Make no mistake: Our attitude is the organization’s altitude!

As leaders, every day we have a choice. And the answers are not always apparent, particularly in today’s world defined by disruption, digitization and economic fluctuation, requiring more than static strategies. We need to adapt, align and act.

It takes resolve to meet our resolution.

Think of resolve as the muscle and the motivation—the drive, the persistence, the willingness to push through challenges. It’s the energy that fuels our action. Think of resolution as the mindset—the clarity, the intention, the “why” behind what we choose to pursue.

Indeed, as we begin this New Year, let us resolve not just to make resolutions—but to be resolute.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by