I Need Your Support

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|January 21, 2026

I Need Your Support

A rising number of new CEOs are fighting for something critical from workers: their backing.

Key takeaways

Why a CEO's ability to build a following fast is more important now
Three ways successful CEOs build company-wide support
How to avoid performative leadership

3 Ways CEOs Can Build a Following

Name many of the top traits that come to mind when you think about a successful CEO and words like strategic, emotionally intelligent, and flexible may fit the bill.

But according to experts, one of the biggest indicators of success for CEOs—first-time leaders and veterans alike— is their ability to build a following, and fast. That’s become a critical factor in CEO searches in recent months as more employees are “job hugging” and staying put, while the rate of CEO turnover continues to rise, thanks to pressure to perform amid market volatility and geopolitical uncertainty. Indeed, CEO turnover jumped from 7% in 2024 to 12% last year, according to the Conference Board. The result: longer-tenured employees, many of whom are uncertain about their own futures, are either looking to find inspiration from new CEOs or highly skeptical of what new leadership may be able to do, providing new chiefs an opportunity to prove themselves.

“The ability to create followership quickly is more of a differentiation than ever before,” says Tierney Remick, co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. “You can’t lead if no one follows.”

The need to create support, and fast, has boards looking beyond typical CEO skills and analyzing 360 reviews to see what kind of following-building skills candidates may have— and not just with their direct reports. “It’s one thing to get great reviews from the team you lead and another to hear peers say I don’t think I could work with this person,” says Stu Crandell, senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. “It can be a knockout factor.”

To be sure, the ability to inspire employees and cultivate a willing audience has become more complicated as employees prioritize various workplace desires. “Leaders are influencing five generations at once, each with different styles, expectations, and motivations,” says Chris Von Der Ahe, senior client partner in the Consumer Markets practice at Korn Ferry. “Your message still needs to be consistent, but the way you deliver it may need to flex.”

Here’s how distinctive CEOs are gaining a following, and fast.

1. They Avoid a One-Size-Fits-All Leadership Style

While leaders must be clear and consistent in direction, successful CEOs who understand they must be nuanced in communication to be able to bridge perspectives and translate strategy into relevance for different audiences are far more likely to build a durable following, says Marina Ferreira, senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s São Paulo office. “They allow flexibility in how shared fundamentals such as respect and fairness are experienced,” she adds.

With finance teams, for example, CEOs may dive deep into data to illustrate a point. But when speaking with creative teams, they can use storytelling. Or when speaking with employees in, say, India, a more hierarchical message may be more appropriate than in, Scandinavia, where consensus is prized.

2. They Don’t Just Go Through the Motions

People can tell when leaders are trying to really understand and listen versus simply going through the motions, and one of the easiest ways to erode burgeoning support is to act inauthentic. “Employees are quick to detect performative leadership,” Ferreira says. “Employees follow leaders who are confident, yet human, and who acknowledge uncertainty without losing direction.”

Von Der Ahe says a CEO’s leadership team is a critical element to authenticity, because they’re the ones “who translate your intent into day-to-day reality.” Adds Joe Griesedieck, a Korn Ferry vice chairman: “Closing themselves off to contrasting views and overplaying the strength of their own convictions can be a trap for CEOs.”

Board & CEO Services

Better leaders for a better world

Learn more

3 They Prioritize People

In an era of AI enthusiasm it may sound trite, but CEOs who invest time to build rapport and human connections tend to gain legitimacy faster. “A high degree of emotional intelligence is critical to establish trust and credibility,” Griesedieck says.

Even the busiest CEOs can do this by hosting listening sessions with small groups and just asking, “How are you?” and learning about employees’ interests outside of work. “Personal relationships and genuine interest in people are powerful trust builders,” Ferreira says.

Discover more of Korn Ferry’s services for CEOs.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Stuart S. Crandell
Senior Client Partner

Tierney Remick
Vice Chairman,  Co-Leader, Board & CEO Services

Chris Von Der Ahe
Senior Client Partner, Consumer Markets, Managing Partner, Los Angeles

Marina Ferreira

Joe Griesedieck

Featured Insights

Disclosing Board Diversity: Discriminatory or Not?
The 'Climate Change' Director
Board Directors: Staying Virtual
50 Women CEOs Now…and Counting

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Board & CEO Services

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Board & CEO Services