Britian’s AI Experiment: Down in Jobs So Far

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 2, 2026

Britian’s AI Experiment: Down in Jobs So Far

As the country seeks to become a global AI hub, it is seeing productivity rise but jobs decline 8%. Is it a short-term phenomenon?

It is a clear goal for the UK, to become a global AI hub. And with private firms investing 78 billion pounds alone in the sector year, it has indeed become a world leader in the once-in-a-generation technology. But workforce changes may not be the country had in mind.

According to a new study, productivity has risen 11% percent from the use of AI at firms, but the technology has resulted in an 8 percent loss of job in the past 12 months. That’s more than the AI job loss in Japan (7 percent), Germany (4 percent) and Australia (4 percent) that the report followed. The study also found that AI has caused a net gain of jobs in the US (2 percent), while boosting productivity 11 percent as well.

To be sure, the AI impact on job may be overstated some, says Drew Hill, a Korn Ferry senior client partner in London. UK weakness is concentrated in roles that are exposed to computer automation. “That’s where AI substitutes show up first,” he says. Plus, the lack of hiring in the UK is due to many reasons. Economic growth in Britain is slowing, down to 1.3% in September from 1.9% a year before, according to government data; increased corporate labor taxes and some political instability have made executives reluctant to spend on hiring.

Still, the heavy investment, experts say, wasn’t intended to create a more difficult job market, especially for younger forces. Indeed, many thought that tech-savvy younger works would benefit from Ai injections, yet even recent highly educated graduates in Britain are finding it hard to get on the corporate ladder. “Companies have to make a fundamental decision: It’s short-term cost saving of hiring versus a long-term need for educated talent,” says Fiona Vickers, Korn Ferry’s senior client partner and managing director, digital.

Already, there is a high level of youth unemployment (15 to 24 years), currently at 13.7%, the highest rate since late 2020. That compares with an overall jobless rate of 5.1% in November. That means it’s tough for young people to take the first step on the corporate ladder. And that includes recent graduates from top universities. “We need to engage young people, or else they will feel disenfranchised,” Hill says. That could mean those young people do not find suitable work, turn to cynicism, and perceive victimization. That isn’t ideal for the British economy because it doesn’t benefit from many talented people.

Some experts are hoping the job loss may only be short-term phenomenon, says Ben Frost, Korn Ferry’s senior client partner, EMEA. From the Industrial Revolution in the 1700s to the computer revolution in the 1970s and the dot-com surge in the 1990s, innovations have always created new jobs. And typically, those jobs are the ones the vast majority of people never imagined, such as smartphones. “The challenge is that it’s hard to see what it is going to manifest in the future,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s AI in the Workplace capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Drew Hill
Senior Client Partner

Fiona Vickers
Senior Client Partner and Managing Director, Digital

Benjamin Frost
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Feb 2 - Feb 8)
This Week in Leadership (Feb 2- Feb 8)

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Future of Work

AI in the Workplace

Organization Strategy

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

Professional Search

Assessment & Succession

Leadership & Professional Assessments

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by