Leadership with Grace

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|February 1, 2026

Leadership with Grace

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison argues that decency is an essential leadership trait.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of I Need a Job!

Whether we’re immersed in warmth and love or burdened by heartache and loss, each day starts the same. With every sunrise, we have a choice.

One month ago, we ushered in a New Year with anticipation for what the next twelve months might bring.

A turn of the page with promises of hope, perhaps more empathy and much more understanding. Yet, differences continue to overshadow our commonalities, with a stronger need for compassion, conversation and dialogue.

So, what is leadership asking of us now? It’s both a rhetorical question and a statement. And it invites reflection and exploration of a world that’s not about us, but about others.

Leadership is inspiring others to believe—and enabling that belief to become reality. But at its best, it strives for more….

Leadership transforms self-interest into shared interest.

It is elevating and constructing.

Leadership is uniting.

It offers a voice to the voiceless.

Leadership listens to those who feel unheard.

It is knowing that it is not about us – but it starts with us.

And above all, leadership is grounded in Grace.

For grace is what makes us inherently human—the better self that shines a light for others. A light that can illuminate even the darkest moments.

I often reflect on the words of 19th-century minister Edward Everett Hale: “I am only one; but still I am one. I cannot do everything; but still I can do something; and because I cannot do everything, I will not refuse to do the something that I can do.”

Let us all remember our shared humanity.

My thoughts and compassion are with our colleagues and clients, as well as their families and friends—especially those who have been affected in the Minneapolis community.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

The Thing About Hope
When Reality Meets Hope

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by