5 Ways to Step Up When a Colleague Leaves

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 24, 2025

5 Ways to Step Up When a Colleague Leaves

With firms cutting back or freezing hiring, many workers are looking to secure their roles. Here are some steps they can take.

When a colleague leaves, there’s a host of emotions coworkers could experience. But these days, there’s a good chance those remaining will experience one thing: extra work.

A coworker might leave, but the deals they were negotiating, the spreadsheets they were compiling, and their other tasks don’t just fade away. And these days, organizations are increasingly relying on the colleagues who remain to pick up the slack. As firms slow down hiring, an organization might take months to replace a departed worker. That’s if they replace them at all. More than half of business leaders anticipate having layoffs before the year is out, according to a recent survey. “When a manager initially tells an employee that a colleague has left and you need to pick up additional responsibilities, it is often met with a sigh or a groan,” says Mark Royal, a senior client partner for Korn Ferry Advisory.

However, the departure of a coworker who isn’t replaced could be a hidden opportunity to learn new skills and enhance your profile within the organization. Plus, if you do a good job taking on additional responsibilities, it might even lead to better pay and a promotion (just don’t expect those early on). Here are five ways to step in when your colleague leaves.

Recognize the opportunity.

Taking on additional work might not be fun, exactly, but experts say it’s important to have a positive attitude about it, at least at the outset. A sudden departmental vacancy can be an opportunity not only to increase your value to the organization, but also to meet a variety of different stakeholders you wouldn’t have necessarily had exposure to, Royal says. If the work you’re picking up after a colleague departs is different from what you’re currently doing, those extra responsibilities will help you get additional experience and develop new skills.

Be proactive.

Rather than waiting for your boss to assign you something, volunteer to take over specific tasks or roles. “If you can do so without completely overextending yourself, raise your hand to take on some of the workload, instead of waiting for your manager to assign you tasks, projects, or clients,” says Korn Ferry Advance career and leadership coach Val Olson.

Don’t just vaguely ask, “What can I do?” Think about your former colleague’s job responsibilities and determine which ones fit best with your skills and strengths. Volunteer for tasks that align with your interests, Olson says, or that provide you with the opportunity to develop a skill, learn something new, or showcase different abilities.

Ask for support.

Don’t be shy about asking your manager for training or guidance if you’re taking on a new task, Royal says. Consider asking your boss to help you prioritize your existing workload to make room for additional tasks. For instance, ask if you can pause lower-priority work or pass it to another colleague so you can focus on your new, higher-priority tasks. “Plan to check in with your manager regularly to determine how things are going,” Royal says.

Be realistic.

Taking on additional work is good, but don’t inadvertently sign yourself up for 80-hour workweeks. Make sure that the workload you’re offering to take on is sustainable. “You might not want to set expectations that you can do two full-time jobs,” says Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

If it’s just a short-term fix while management looks for a replacement, you can probably manage the extra hours for two or three weeks, Royal says. But if your boss doesn’t know when or if a replacement will be hired, you should make sure what you’re agreeing to take on is manageable. “Recognize that you do have the ability to say no to an assignment that would push you over the edge,” Olson says.

Don’t expect a promotion right away.

Even if you proactively raise your hand, be aware that stepping in for a colleague probably won’t lead to an immediate raise or promotion. “If you expect that, then you are setting yourself up for frustration,” Amato says.

However, as part of your ongoing check-ins with your manager, it’s a good idea to talk about the effect of your new responsibilities on the configuration of your role, as well as the rewards that go along with taking on more responsibility, Royal says. He suggests telling your manager, “I’m happy to help but let’s have a discussion a month or three months down the road about what this means for me.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Upskilling & Reskilling

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

Assessment & Succession

Cultural Transformation

Change Management

Business Transformation

People Cost Optimization

Career Transition & Outplacement

Talent Acquisition

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Workforce Transformation