Gifts for the Workplace: Tread Carefully

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 8, 2025

Gifts for the Workplace: Tread Carefully

In a season of economic stressors, experts advise erring on the modest side with workplace gifts. Here are five strategies.

Unsure what to gift colleagues this year? If it seems like the rules of gift giving have suddenly shifted, that’s because they have. Many friends, bosses, and colleagues at work are weathering vastly different financial situations. Some are facing the recent layoffs of spouses. Others are flying high. Still others are fine for the moment, but are worried about their jobs. In a culture where one in six gifts goes to a coworker, these developments have shifted the calculus of gift giving.

Call it the year of small but mighty gifts. “This is not the year to splash expensive gifts on people,” says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. Practicality and appreciation is in, and luxury is out. The reasoning is straightforward: You don’t want to create an obligation, says Royal, and a splashy gift tends to do that. So what to buy colleagues and bosses?

Always start with the organization’s HR policies and cultural norms, says Reena Patel, a principal in the Global Financial Officers practice at Korn Ferry. Many companies set limits on the type or value of gifts, and the last thing you want to do is trigger a policy violation. Here’s how to handle your holiday-season gift giving at work.

Keep gifts small but mighty.

Think little and personal, but not too personal. Items that belong on an office desk—such as a nice pen they’ll actually use, or a book they’ll love—are safe bets. Humorous is also good: For instance, a gag gift will succeed on a team where humor is part of the culture, says Patel. “Keep it light.”

Go all-office.

You can’t go wrong bringing something to share with the team or office, whether it’s an assortment of fancy coffee pods, a nifty puzzle, or an air-purifying plant for the lobby. Taking this approach means you don’t have to choose individual gifts; it’s always a popular way to go. Patel suggests small gestures that bring people together, like a shared dessert. “It’s the gift of time and connection,” she says.

Follow your boss’s lead.

Many leaders don’t encourage boss gifts... but some do. Opinions on the matter tend to be divided. “In general, I don’t find it appropriate for employees to give their managers gifts,” says organizational strategist Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. Pay attention, and follow suit: Is your boss giving his boss a gift? Are your colleagues giving him one?

Consider a group gift for the boss.

If the boss really deserves a gift, go in on it together. “Team members can contribute at whatever level is appropriate—or just sign the card,” Royal says (he notes that this approach also helps you avoid looking as though you’re currying favor). Experiential gifts are always winners: theater tickets, seats at a sporting event, or a coffee subscription.

When in doubt, go handmade.

You can never go wrong with homemade apple cake, a handwritten card, or a new office terrarium. “Handmade gifts are a wonderful way to show you care,” says Amato—and they fit every budget.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Employee Experience capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Reena Patel
Senior Client Partner, Global Financial Officers’ & Healthcare Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Upskilling & Reskilling

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

Assessment & Succession

Cultural Transformation

Change Management

Business Transformation

People Cost Optimization

Career Transition & Outplacement

Talent Acquisition

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by