5 Talents to Help ‘AI-Proof’ Your Career

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 4, 2025

5 Talents to Help ‘AI-Proof’ Your Career

Fear about losing jobs to AI is rampant. Our experts say these talents can help make you more valuable in the AI era.

Nearly everyone is worried about how AI will impact their jobs.

How could they not be, given all of the headlines about AI-related layoffs and the bold predictions by CEOs that the technology will change literally every job? The pressure on employees to demonstrate AI readiness and fluency is so great that, in one study, 75% of employees said they would “face repercussions” if they didn’t use AI.

So how can you “AI-proof” a career? The answer, at its most basic, is to not be afraid of the technology, says Tanyth Lloyd, global vice president of technology and transformation for Korn Ferry’s RPO practice. “If you can demonstrate your ability to work hand in glove with AI, you’ll find opportunities are likely to increase, not decrease,” she says.

Where most people go wrong, says Lloyd, is in thinking that AI-proofing a career means becoming an engineering or coding expert. Some technological know-how is required, of course, but experts are quick to point out that other skills are just as important. With that in mind, here are five aptitudes Korn Ferry’s experts say are in demand today across roles and functions.

Be people-smart.

It’s important to remember that AI skills don’t necessarily revolve around technology. Human skills like communication, collaboration, and negotiation “are core to thriving and instilling trust where fear is building today,” says Jerry Collier, leader of the Assessment and Succession practice for Korn Ferry in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. As AI transforms routine tasks, the demand for people-centric skills will only grow, Collier adds.

Know your subject matter.

That’s Lloyd’s simple advice. The better you know the context, nuances, history, and other critical aspects of your subject matter, the more value you can extract out of AI. It’s not that you have to be as smart as AI, say experts. Rather, you need to know how to prompt effectively, evaluate responses capably, and make decisions that produce tangible, in-demand outcomes.

Think data, not AI.

AI sounds big and scary and overwhelming to most people, but what powers AI is data. That means a foundational skill—for everyone—is the ability to frame problems in terms that data can answer, says Collier. “Being comfortable interpreting and telling stories with data shows that you understand AI at a conceptual level and can critically evaluate its outputs,” he says. Put another way, employers are going to need people whose fluency in generating and interpreting data also enables them to spot bias, hallucinations, and other AI imperfections.

Be a uniter.

So far, only about one in five AI pilot programs are eventually scaled across the enterprise. Most AI tools and projects that catch on are isolated—limited to individual functions or disciplines. For AI to generate meaningful returns, say experts, firms will need people with the creativity, diplomacy, and strategic thinking to seamlessly unite tools and projects across business units. That means employers will prize workers who can manage relationships, reduce waste or speed efficiency by improving processes between units, and demonstrate or build skills while working with cross-functional teams.

Learn to unlearn.

The biggest obstacle to AI transformation isn’t the people who refuse to adapt, but rather those who are only going through the motions. To be sure, one in six employees in a recent study said they were “pretending to use AI or appear up-to-date” to appease their bosses. That mindset can be insidious to transformation efforts, say experts. Recruiters and hiring managers are looking for people who are willing to experiment, engage, and take risks. Korn Ferry research on what makes an AI-ready leader found that firms need talent that can “rethink long-held habits, redesign workflows and work processes, and continually refresh their skills for the roles of tomorrow.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Assessment and Succession capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tanyth Lloyd
Global Vice President, Technology & Transformation

Jerry Collier
Solution Leader, EMEA Assessment & Succession

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Future of Work

AI in the Workplace

Business Skills

Coaching

Korn Ferry Career

Organizational Communications

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by