Turning Can't into Can

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|September 22, 2025

Turning Can't into Can

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison describes three transformative mindsets that help leaders thrive through ambiguity.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

The question—straightforward. The answer—perhaps counterintuitive.

It happened just the other day during our quarterly earnings call. Amid the discussion, one of the financial analysts remarked, “I’m sure you’d love a stronger environment, but curious how you can still win business in a weaker environment.”

Without hesitation I replied: “This is the best environment … It’s where I’m most motivated.” This is where great companies become even greater companies.

When the way forward is perplexing, the first reaction may very well be, “Oh, we can’t do that …” Given our human nature, people often don’t want change unless there is a reason.

The current environment is that reason to change. These days it’s not enough to merely deal with ambiguity. Leadership is all about helping people actively embrace it.

But here’s the thing. When we know that disruption is coming, and it’s unclear exactly what it will be—the default is often to focus first on strategy, structure, process, and technology. The real starting point, though, is not just skill set—it’s mindset.

That’s how we go from Can’t … to Can.

Among the myriad mindsets that enable great leadership today, our Korn Ferry Institute spotlights three as the most transformative:

Purpose Mindset. As the ancient proverb tells us, one who moves a mountain begins by carrying away small stones. And that takes purpose. From place to place, season to season—the landscape is always changing. But the destination, embodied by an overarching purpose that literally moves people, remains the same. A sense of belonging to something bigger than ourselves propels us from can’t to can.

Me-to-We Mindset. Forget WIIFM. Rather than “what’s in it for me,” leaders must expand the individual me to the collective we. It’s how we can move our organizations to an acclimation of transformation.

As Kevin Cashman, vice chairman of Korn Ferry’s CEO & Enterprise Leadership practice, told me recently, “Before we have a chance to move from can’t to can, we first have to become aware of our own internal ‘can’t do it’ dialogue running under the surface. Then, with self-awareness and courage, we can choose to go to ‘can’ together.”

And, as Niren Chaudhary, former chair and former CEO of Panera Brands, shared with us just the other day, it’s a state of mind: “When I think I can’t, therefore I must—that’s how we grow and expand our capacity to be and do more.”

Courage Mindset. Harnessing the power of change for the good of the enterprise takes leadership. Courage is contagious.

So, when we have an idea … tell someone. If we want to try something … ask. When we want to collaborate … just do it. And, if we stand for something … let it be for opportunity and purpose.

As our firm’s research shows, leaders who embody these mindsets energize their enterprises, influence their entire ecosystems, and can even grow their organizations faster than their peers.

When our mindset changes, everything else follows.

Balls were bouncing off the pitcher’s mound; others skyrocketed to the outfield. It was at a ballfield a few years ago, and things were going from bad to worse.

The catcher had the skill and physical ability. But with a lot of fans in the stands, he suddenly couldn’t make even the simplest of throws back to the pitcher. Then one day, while seated behind home plate, I heard someone singing a nursery rhyme. “Mary had a little lamb … little lamb, little lamb …”

The singer was actually the catcher—now making every single throw without an error. As it turned out, this young player had been advised by a former professional catcher to take himself out of the moment—and into a new mindset.

Only one letter separates can’t from can. And it’s our belief—in ourselves and especially in what others can achieve.

Indeed, that’s what turns Can’t into Can—mindset before skill set.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by