What Happened to Having a Career?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 13, 2025

What Happened to Having a Career?

After a spell of job hopping, employees are clinging to their jobs. How that may pose risks to firms and people’s careers.

Whether they’re coding software, filing legal paperwork, fixing air conditioners, or nearly anything else, US workers are feeling stuck. It may be up to their firms to redefine how to build careers today.

Nearly two-thirds of workers, 65%, say they think career progress is an illusion, according to a survey by MyPerfectResume. Their organizations are offering more responsibilities, they say, instead of raises or recognition. A meaningful minority of workers, 20%, feel frustrated, another 20% feel burnt-out, and 13% feel trapped. “So many feel they’re so limited,” says Smriti Kangovi, managing consultant in Korn Ferry’s North America Technology practice.

The latest data comes on the heels of similar results from surveys done over the summer. In a poll commissioned by The Wall Street Journal, nearly 70% of people—the highest level in nearly 15 years of surveys—said the American dream (if you work hard, you will get ahead) no longer holds true, or never did. The discontent was widespread across genders, political affiliations, ethnicities, and incomes.

This broader sense of pessimism is particularly worrisome for many employers. An employee’s work engages them in part by giving them the confidence they can achieve their career objectives at the firms where they’re working. But how many workers actually feel that way today? “Everybody has to think that their effort will lead to something good for themselves,” says David Ellis, Korn Ferry’s senior vice president of talent transformation.

There will almost always be people who feel their careers should be progressing faster. And it’s in the nature of US businesses—even in boom times—for there to be fewer promotions, big raises, and plum assignments there are employees who want them, says Mark Royal, senior client partner for Korn Ferry Advisory.

But there are a variety of reasons why employees might feel lost careerwise. The robust job market of three years ago is gone, replaced by an environment in which unemployment is low but companies have significantly fewer open roles. Organizations also have decreased the number of manager slots, which limits the availability of roles people can advance into. Even at firms that haven’t cut management layers, promotions are fewer and farther between than they were pre-pandemic, and raises are not robust. Numerous organizations have asked employees to return to the office full-time, increase their productivity, or both. At the same time, there’s talk about how AI will transform—or make unnecessary—thousands of different roles.

Experts point to multiple ways employers can fight the malaise. Organizations need to make sure that their policies on raises and promotions are clear, known, and equitable, Royal says. Companies also can help employees understand that their careers can advance even without traditional milestones such as raises or promotions. For example, firms that have fewer management layers can highlight how individual employees have more autonomy and are getting skills and exposure that might not necessarily be available elsewhere. “What they offer is a different type of growth than the typical hierarchical progression,” Royal says.

At companies where promotions and hiring are frozen, it’s critical for leaders to highlight that advancement opportunities are not gone forever. Experts say that leaders should give individual employees the resources to help them take little steps toward advancement, such as time they can use to take a training course. Changing the mix of work assignments can also help make employees feel more positively about their roles, Royal says, potentially giving them more work that they enjoy doing and less work they don’t.

It can also be helpful for organizations to connect the firm’s mission to the values and missions that drive individual employees. That can be as simple as reminding employees what their work—no matter how big or small—is building toward. “If you are clear on the purpose of your work, you are better positioned to navigate and achieve success in an uncertain world,” says Guangrong Dai, senior director of research at the Korn Ferry Institute. Indeed, Anya Weaver, a Korn Ferry principal consultant, says that the most professionally fulfilled people she works with focus on their purpose rather than their particular position. “They’re more content, and they see more growth in what they’re doing each and every day,” she says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Employee Experience capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Smriti Kangovi
Managing Consultant, Technology Professional Search

David Ellis, PhD
Senior Vice President, Talent Transformation

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Guangrong Dai
Senior Director of Research, Korn Ferry Institute

Anya Weaver
Principal Consultant

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by