Will RTO Take a Holiday?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 4, 2025

Will RTO Take a Holiday?

Three-quarters of employees have in-office requirements now. Will those get enforced the rest of the year?

The period between US Thanksgiving and New Year’s is often a logistical minefield at the office, as managers balance vacation schedules—including their own—to ensure critical work gets done. But this holiday season, there’s a new wrinkle that adds another degree of difficulty to the juggling act: return to office.

CEOs across much of the globe have spent the last 12 months not only increasing return-to-office requirements, but also explicitly telling employees who don’t like them to consider working elsewhere. The result: Along with holiday time off, many workers may want to work from home during the holidays, as they did before RTO got tough. The question now is: How far will managers go to enforce in-office policies? “Is a manager willing to stick their neck out if the policy is very clear and it potentially has an impact on their own role?” says Dennis Deans, Korn Ferry’s global human resources business partner.

Experts believe that employees’ demands to work remotely will increase around the holidays, strictly because of the sheer complexity this period can bring. For one thing, the holidays can cause higher stress levels in some employees. Workers also have to handle additional care responsibilities while schools and daycare centers are closed. Finally, the holidays involve visiting family, managing travel logistics, and hosting.

Many leaders feel the return-to-office situation is settled. In 2025, about three-quarters of US workers—up from 63% in 2023—are required to be in the office on a fixed number of days each week. Bosses believe that having everyone work in the same place boosts collaboration and teamwork, improves productivity, and strengthens company culture. Research confirms that, for some tasks, having everyone around is clearly better.

But there’s still plenty of uncertainty and angst around the issue. Most employees want some sort of flexibility around where they work. Meanwhile, a majority of Gen Zers and millennials who are actively looking for a new job say one big reason is that they’re unhappy with office-attendance requirements.

Many of the people responsible for enforcement aren’t thrilled to be attendance monitors, either. Indeed, 63% of US HR leaders and 56% globally are under pressure to enforce RTO policies, according to a survey done by HR software firm Leapsome. At the same time, 81% of those HR leaders believe that RTO mandates are ineffective, especially during high-stress periods like the holidays.

Experts suggest that leaders show flexibility around return-to-office mandates in the upcoming period. As long as work gets done, perhaps where it’s getting done is less critical, at least for a few weeks. “It’s the human element,” Deans says. That said, this kind of leeway may not be possible for some industries, such as retail. The period leading up to December 26th is usually the busiest time for retailers: Employees, including executives, are absolutely expected to be at corporate offices, stores, warehouses, or other site locations, says Craig Rowley, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in retail. After the 26th, however, things slow considerably, so it seems fair to allow people to work remotely or use up vacation time. “That would be a relief valve, from my viewpoint,” Rowley says.

RTO around the holidays will be a particularly acute issue this year in at least one nation: In the United Arab Emirates, there traditionally hasn’t been much time off around Christmas or New Year’s. A change in the national school calendar now effectively gives students the entire month of December off, says Iktimal Daneshvar, Korn Ferry’s vice president of recruitment process outsourcing in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. That means that for the first time, working parents will have their kids at home for an extended period during the holidays. “Companies that really have a strong employee on-site presence are now having to rethink,” Daneshvar says. She suspects that many of those parents will still be working—just working from home.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Employee Experience capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

Iktimal Daneshvar
Vice President, Senior Client Partner, Recruitment Process Outsourcing (RPO) , EMEA

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Talent Acquisition

Leadership & Professional Assessments

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by