Choose Your Own Job Rejection

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 1, 2025

Choose Your Own Job Rejection

In an unexpected twist, wanting to work in-office can get you rejected. So can working from home.

The candidate was thrilled to make it to the third round of interviews for a great job. Then he slipped up. He said, “I’d love to work daily at your headquarters—I’d be happy to relocate.” Fairly soon, he received a rejection letter from the recruiter.

Call it the new cultural divide in the recruiting process. In the topsy-turvy world of RTO, a surprising twist is catching job candidates off-guard. Five years after the pandemic, company cultures are becoming entrenched in their in-office, hybrid, or remote behaviors—so much so that candidates frequently get rejected for expressing a preference for a daily work style that is at odds with the firm’s norms. “Maybe they aren’t willing to work in-office four days a week, or really don’t work remotely,” says Dennis Deans, global human resources business partner at Korn Ferry. “That’s where some people don’t progress further.”

It comes at a highly difficult period for job candidates, as companies have dramatically slashed the number of job openings recently. Indeed, the Conference Board, the nonprofit think tank that surveys employment trends, says confidence in finding roles has hit its lowest level since early 2021, when COVID lockdowns limited job opportunities. Candidates find themselves jostling for a single job with thousands of AI-aided applicants—and now there’s yet another hurdle to overcome. “The stress comes when the company isn’t forthright about their logic behind whatever their work policy is,” says JP Sniffen, practice leader of the Military Center of Expertise at Korn Ferry.

Still, experts say entry- and mid-level applicants may be making it harder on recruiters by being hard to read. Desperate for a job, they often send contradictory signals. They might say they’d love to work hybrid or remotely, but also express a need for mentoring, even as they’re complaining about disconnection. “They’re speaking out of both sides of their mouths,” says Matt Bohn, senior client partner in the Technology practice at Korn Ferry. Meanwhile, C-suite candidates tend to be explicit about their needs. Hiring experts say that in lower-ranking roles, the topic comes up later in the hiring process, typically during or after a third interview round. For senior-level positions, it’s often in the first round of interviews that candidates ask about the firm’s policy, employee options, and which requirements are actually enforced.

Many companies, of course, have been insisting that workers return to the office for some or all of the week. Others have maintained almost completely remote operations. That leaves candidates, if they have the flexibility, to play a guessing game on what the hiring manager is looking for. “I find that after the dust has settled, workplace flexibility is a huge part of individual recruitability,” says Andrea Wolf, senior client partner in the Consumer and Consumer Health practices at Korn Ferry.

Experts suggest that job candidates make sure that they know how to play the interview game, which includes letting the interviewer describe the position’s location requirements. One strategy is to ascertain whether a future boss and hiring manager are working at home or in the office (often obvious from the background of a Zoom call) and extrapolate accordingly. Experts also advise thinking through the compensation implications of requesting an urban in-office location: For example, a candidate in a cheap, rural zip code in upstate New York might cost the company more in compensation if they’re working out of the New York City office.

Experts counsel companies to develop clarity on their cultures, and to reinforce it often. The firms that are best able to hire candidates often have a clear and sensible articulation of why workers need to come into the office or stay home, says Sniffen. “When workers are required to come in-office, yet spend their days on video calls, there’s no real logic to it,” he says. “That’s difficult for companies to overcome from a talent-recruitment standpoint.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Recruitment capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

JP Sniffen
Practice Leader, Military COE & Physical Security

Matt Bohn
Senior Client Partner, Technology Practice

Andrea Wolf
Senior Client Partner, Consumer & Consumer Health Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Talent Recruitment

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by