The Perils of Deprioritizing EQ

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|September 15, 2025

The Perils of Deprioritizing EQ

A Korn Ferry study shows leaders aren’t prioritizing emotional intelligence and engagement. What happens when these skills wane?

Key takeaways

Why emotional intelligence and engagement have dropped on the desirable skills lists
How to ensure connection and communication stay top of mind for leaders
Advice for how executives can upskill in AI without a loss of engagement

Why EQ Needs to Remain a Leadership Priority

Every few years, the pendulum of desired leadership characteristics seems to shift. During the pandemic, leaders’ empathy and compassion helped shepherd remote workforces through months of uncertainty. During the financial crisis of 2008, leaders’ decisiveness and assertiveness were pillars of stability amid economic volatility. And today? Leaders who prioritize AI proficiency.

In a recent Korn Ferry survey of 250 CEOs and board directors, nearly 70% of respondents said AI/tech proficiency was the number one skill to prioritize across the workforce in the next three years. It’s not surprising, of course, that leaders need employees to get comfortable with the game-changing technology. But the intense focus on AI has led to an unintended consequence: Soft skills, such as empathy and courage, are taking a back seat. Fewer than four in 10 respondents rated emotional intelligence as a priority skill, and only 20% said driving engagement was a priority these days. “Now is not the time to neglect your people,” says Elise Schroeter, global head, organization and talent strategies in the Board and CEO Services practice. “Those are the people who will help you weather the storm.”

Indeed, experts note that in times of geopolitical and economic uncertainty, being able to connect and communicate with people is of paramount importance. Studies show that when people are highly engaged, they’re more productive and make better decisions. “If you hire a CEO with low emotional intelligence, that’s going to backfire,” says Jane Edison Stevenson, global vice chair of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. “People aren’t as productive when they don’t feel engaged.”

It can be tempting to deprioritize engagement and EQ when the race to stay up to speed on AI is intensifying. After all, about 80% of survey respondents expect up to 20% of their workforce to be replaced by AI in two to three years; such a development would put a lot of pressure on both employees and their leaders. But “if you’re asking more of people—which companies are doing today—then it makes sense that you need to be making sure people are engaged,” says Ed Brady, a Korn Ferry senior client partner.

What’s more, innovation requires emotional intelligence and engagement, and experts say no amount of tech fluency will compensate for the absence of some of the softer skills. “It’s not an either-or situation, but one where these skills reinforce each other,” Stevenson says.

Board & CEO Services

Better leaders for a better world

Learn more

For leaders seeking to upskill in AI without a loss of engagement, experts emphasize the importance of emotional intelligence. Because technology is changing so quickly and can intimidate employees, EQ can be highly effective in culture building by rallying teams and quelling some fears about AI. “If anything, the momentum around AI strikes me as the right time to be more engaged,” Brady says.

Explore more of Korn Ferry’s CEO and Board Survey findings.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

Elise Schroeter
Global Head, Organization & Talent Strategies, Board & CEO Practice, Managing Partner, CEO/C-Suite Impact Accelerator

Ed Brady
Senior Client Partner

Featured Insights

Disclosing Board Diversity: Discriminatory or Not?
The 'Climate Change' Director
Board Directors: Staying Virtual
50 Women CEOs Now…and Counting

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Board & CEO Services

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by