Corporate Profits Are Growing. Will Hiring?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 28, 2025

Corporate Profits Are Growing. Will Hiring?

S&P 500 firms are on track to post their best quarterly results since 2021. Will it translate into more hiring?

It wasn’t supposed to be like this. With tariffs, trade tensions, and consumers cutting back on spending, all signs pointed to corporate earnings taking a hit this quarter. But instead, profits are growing—even more than analysts expected.

So far, S&P 500 companies are on track to post their best quarterly results since 2021. Nearly nine out of ten companies reporting third-quarter earnings have beat analyst estimates, with those in the financial, information-technology, and industrial sectors leading the way. S&P 500 companies are on track to report earnings growth of 9.2%, nearly a point and half above what analysts projected when the third quarter ended on September 30. The question now: What will they do with the extra earnings?

Jason Waterman, a senior client partner in the Global Financial Officers practice at Korn Ferry, says that firms have grown earnings amid economic volatility through a studious combination of investor-pleasing measures like cost-cutting, investment in AI, and stock buybacks. The first two measures are correlated—AI spending is expected to lead to growth as efficiency and productivity improve and less labor is needed. As for buybacks, as of mid-August, US firms had announced nearly $1 trillion worth, slightly below the all-time high of $1.1 trillion in 2022. The approach, says Waterman, is “control what you can, and invest in the business.”

To be sure, only 30% of S&P 500 companies have reported earnings so far, and the third-quarter outlook still could be substantially altered, with others—including major technology, consumer goods, industrial and manufacturing firms—set to report in the next two weeks.

David Wise, vice chairman of the Rewards practice at Korn Ferry, says clients plan to budget for full-year 2026 by following the same course of returning capital to shareholders and invest in the business, particularly until there is more clarity on such issues as the US government shutdown, tariffs, and AI. “They are planning to hold the line, and put any excess cash towards AI transformation,” he says.

For workers, that may mean less hiring. Major technology, financial, and consumer-goods leaders have publicly stated they believe their firms can grow while maintaining or even downsizing their workforces. “Companies aren’t in a rush to hire,” is how Beau Lambert, a senior client partner in the Financial Officers practice at Korn Ferry, characterizes what he’s hearing from CFO clients. He says firms are being rewarded for buybacks and AI investment, which are higher priorities for investors than adding headcount is. “The mantra is, stay lean and be surgical,” says Lambert.

Put another way, there will be hiring, but in a much more “targeted and pointed way,” says Waterman. Industries that are perpetually understaffed, like healthcare, will see more hiring than others, but overall Waterman expects firms to focus on candidates with in-demand skills and roles. Lambert agrees, saying CFOs are trying to balance returning capital to keep the market happy with asking if enough is going back into innovation, people, and long-term differentiators. “The best CFOs are using this moment to think a few cycles ahead,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Board and CEO Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jason Waterman
Senior Client Partner, Financial Officers Practice

David Wise
Vice Chairman, Rewards

Beau Lambert
Senior Client Partner, Financial Officer Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Organization Strategy

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by