5 Tips for Picking the Right Training Course

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|September 4, 2025

5 Tips for Picking the Right Training Course

Skills-training and certificate programs are expected to balloon into a $3 billion business by decade’s end. Deciding which courses to take is a challenge.

The message popped up on LinkedIn: An online university was offering a new training course in AI that matched your profile. In your feed, a former colleague who got laid off posted that they’d earned a certificate in a similar course from another school. And at work, the human resources department was pushing a new internal program of its own.

With so many places offering training and certificate programs, choosing the right one for your career is no easy task. By the end of the decade, professional training and certificate programs are projected to be a $3 billion business serving more than 11 million people in the US alone. There’s also no shortage of research showing that skills-based training is a top priority for both firms and employees. But, as a new study shows, completing a training course or earning a certificate in your industry or function doesn’t always lead to advancement or higher pay—at least, not right away. Michele Capra, a senior client partner and vice president in Korn Ferry’s RPO practice, says accreditation and certificate courses can be valuable if people know what to look for. “They might not provide immediate pay or advancement,” she says, “but they are building blocks for long-term success for people and firms.” With that in mind, our experts offer their tips and advice on picking the course that best serves your goals:

Consider career relevancy.

This one seems like a no-brainer—a marketing pro wouldn’t need a certificate in a finance function—but it gets at a deeper question, says Capra. “Truly understanding where you want to specialize, and choosing courses that capitalize on that, is critical,” she says. She advises asking your manager and HR leaders for input on selecting programs that will help you stand out in the field or role you want to grow or transition into.

Look for more than accreditation.

Accreditation by a recognized industry body is important for credibility, but it’s not the only thing that matters, says Roger Philby, global leader of the People Strategy and Performance practice at Korn Ferry. Put another way, you don’t have to earn a certificate from an Ivy League school to get the training you need. What’s even better than classroom learning, says Philby, is evidence of real-world use cases. Think live projects, simulations, courses backed by industry leaders, and the like. “Fancy logos are nice, but credible proof that the learning leads to results is nicer,” he says.

Go where the market is going.

One-third of leaders in a recent survey say their workforce doesn’t have the right skills to meet tomorrow’s ambitions—as in, not the skills of today, but the ones they’ll need to get them where they want to be in the next five to ten years. To be sure, Philby advises people to evaluate how well the course they’re considering aligns with their future business needs. AI fluency and digital adaptability are table stakes, for instance. But leaders highly value other skills as well, such as human-centered leadership, critical thinking, and decision-making. “The more aligned skills development is with business goals, the more opportunity for career growth,” says Philby.

Get internal sponsorship.

Many firms offer training and learning courses, either on their own or in partnership with a school or outside provider. This, of course, has built-in credibility and visibility within the organization. But if your firm doesn’t offer such opportunities, or if you decide to go above and beyond what it does provide, Capra advises soliciting feedback from HR leaders, managers, mentors, and others inside the organization. Ask them for their advice on which programs or skills would be of most value to your development. “Getting support from internal leaders can turn the learning into opportunity,” she says.

Think beyond the course.

“Many courses can connect you with others in your field, which in turn expands your professional network,” says Capra. And networking, as is well-documented, often leads to opportunity. The industry expertise and background of the instructor can enhance the appeal and credibility of the course. But more than that, networking can also expose you to a wider network of classmates—especially helpful if the course you’re taking is part of a career transition. Or, as Philby puts it, when considering training and credentialing opportunities, remember that career mobility is about more than just completing the course.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Michele Capra
Senior Client Partner and Vice President, RPO

Roger Philby
Global Lead, People Strategy & Performance Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by