The Best Type of Job References

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 8, 2025

The Best Type of Job References

In a difficult job market, our experts explain which testimonials you really need.

Most job applications ask for references. Most candidates choose only bosses or former managers. But is that the right choice?

No, say recruiters. Simply choosing supervisors is a mistake, because they provide only one perspective—which can often be a disservice to a talented applicant. References should give a prospective employer a 360-degree view of a candidate, says Ron Porter, senior partner at Korn Ferry. Hiring managers want to hear from everyone, including colleagues, direct reports, and bosses.

Here’s the special sauce: Ideally, all those references will provide variations on the same message. Rather than one discussing your work ethic, another touting your sense of humor, and a third hyping your team ethos, all three will be best received if they consistently cite one to two characteristics. Perhaps you’re the humorous, get-it-done problem solver, or the tack-sharp strategist who also has a penchant for organizing team outings.

Whatever you do, always talk to references before giving their names to a potential employer. “A bad reference stops me in my tracks,” says JP Sniffen, practice leader of Korn Ferry’s Military Center of Expertise, because it suggests a candidate’s lack of relational awareness.

Here are the types of references Korn Ferry’s experts recommend gathering:

The Boss.

Of course having a supervisor as a reference is important; they can speak to your positive contributions and workplace presence. They also can vouch for your attention to detail, easy personality, and ability to guess what’s needed before it’s articulated. That said, hiring managers understand that a current boss’s reference is not always possible—for instance, if you’ve not yet publicized that you’re looking, or your boss is newly retired in Majorca. “People understand that there are lots of reasons why that’s not always possible,” says strategist Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. Just don’t make all your references people you worked for.

The Colleague.

Colleagues’ references are where hiring managers can perceive authenticity. “How someone behaves as a teammate says a lot about how they are as a leader,” says Porter. Sure, you’re a team player, but a colleague can vouch for how you also help others when there’s no direct advantage to you. In addition, a colleague can identify the topics and situations for which you are the go-to person.

The Subordinate.

Recruiters are all too familiar with candidates who manage up well, but are a nightmare to their own subordinates. Many organizations want to avoid hiring this type of applicant. “This is where the rubber meets the road,” says Porter. A reference from someone who worked for you should share how willing you are to roll up your sleeves and deploy your ability to use challenging situations to foster team growth. Here, your leadership abilities peek through, as well as your talent-development strategies.

The Competitor, Customer, or Client.

It might not occur to you to ask for a reference from a longtime industry rival or a client who has followed you through multiple jobs, but this type of testimonial can be invaluable, experts say. The key is for the reference to align with the role, says Sniffen. For example, in a customer-facing role, your best customer might be the optimal reference. “It’s a red flag to me if someone can’t provide this kind of reference,” Sniffen notes.

The One Unrelated to Work.

This kind of reference can attest to your character, diligence, and problem-solving skills, just as a professional reference can. However, nonwork references are likely to bring up more questions than they answer, such as, “Do we really want a team lead who is so committed to extracurricular activities?”“Be a little hesitant to use someone you don’t know in a professional capacity,” says Amato. Some experts advise using this type of reference only for a first job or a role you’re assuming after taking a long break.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ronald Porter
Senior Partner

JP Sniffen
Practice Leader, Military COE & Physical Security

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Business Skills

Coaching

Korn Ferry Career

Organizational Communications