Is It Urgent or Important? The Paradox Confounding Leaders

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|October 23, 2025

Is It Urgent or Important? The Paradox Confounding Leaders

As CEOs grapple with today’s world of hyper change, directors need to step up and create clarity and discipline.

Key takeaways

Why it’s so difficult for leaders to distinguish between urgent and important matters
How boards can help management teams create clarity and discipline
How leaders can focus on less visible, but more long-term priorities

How Boards Can Help Executives Decide Urgency vs. Importance

The board meeting was supposed to cover typical but key quarterly business: compliance updates, committee reports, a supply-chain briefing. But the night before, a series of tariffs affecting many of the company’s foreign operations were announced. With millions of dollars and the business at stake, the meeting became a scramble, with the CEO uncertain whether to focus on building new domestic plants or creating a new strategy for raising prices.

The meeting’s initial agenda items? Most were skipped.

At a time when everything feels urgent, and priorities for boards and executives seem to shift daily, the distinction between urgency and importance is becoming more critical— and confusing to even the most seasoned executive. “The confusion arises because urgent matters tend to be highly visible and often demand immediate attention, while important matters are usually more strategic and long-term,” says Marina Ferreira, senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice based in Sao Paulo. “This creates a tension where the urgent crowds out the important, even though the latter may be far more consequential to the company.”

To be sure, boards and management teams have been playing some version of whack-a-mole since the pandemic, creating immense confusion and fatigue around how to respond to one crisis after another even as they try to ensure strategic priorities don’t languish in the background. It doesn’t help that some of the urgency comes from investors demanding short-term results. “There’s no place in history where companies grow at 20 percent a year for 50 years, yet that’s what the market seems to expect,” says Tierney Remick, co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice.

This creates quite the paradox: Impatience for long-term investments undermines the performance stakeholders demand. “If you're only driving urgency for near-term accountability because of impatience, you lose the opportunity to reach your future vision,” says Jane Edison Stevenson, global vice chair of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice.

There have been plenty of examples of companies falling prey to this paradox by primarily focusing on what’s urgent—sales and profits, for example—only to overshadow what’s important, like long-term innovation. Years after record sales, these companies find themselves being ousted by other firms that didn’t slash R&D budgets or focus only on getting profits up.

Boards can play a critical role in creating clarity and discipline by distinguishing between short-term firefighting and long-term value creation—and giving proper attention to both, Ferreira says. “Boards should help CEOs frame issues in terms of impact and risk—not only immediacy,” she adds.

Board & CEO Services

Better leaders for a better world

Learn more

This is particularly critical at a time when AI, new regulations, tariffs, and more are dominating board agendas. While these issues are important, a disproportionate focus on them can push long-standing, but less visible priorities—such as CEO succession—further down the list. “The board really needs to be the arbiter of whether the executive team will focus on what's important versus what's urgent,” Stevenson says. “They set the tone for long-term thinking versus crisis response.” Adds Ferreira: “By the time succession or leadership gaps become pressing, it may be too late to act effectively.”

For more insights on board effectiveness, visit Korn Ferry’s leadership hub.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

Tierney Remick
Vice Chairman,  Co-Leader, Board & CEO Services

Featured Insights

Disclosing Board Diversity: Discriminatory or Not?
The 'Climate Change' Director
Board Directors: Staying Virtual
50 Women CEOs Now…and Counting

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Board & CEO Services

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by