CFO Exits: Domino Effect or Burnout?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|September 3, 2025

CFO Exits: Domino Effect or Burnout?

Why 2025 is the year top finance execs are leaving at a pace unseen in years. What’s the impact of having a new finance team?

They make all the critical budget decisions, and effectively do more to set the corporate agenda, perhaps, than anyone but the CEO. Now, chief financial officers are doing something else: exiting.

As CEO departures continue to break records, new CFOs are joining their ranks. In the first half of 2025, 173 publicly traded firms got new CFOs, on pace to break the single-year record. What’s more, just over a third of CFOs at midmarket firms are considering leaving, a product of CEOs themselves exiting, as well as demographics and burnout. “A lot of long-tenured CFOs are simply stepping out,” says Beau Lambert, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Financial Officer Center of Expertise. Over the past year, Lambert says, Korn Ferry has had a record number of finance-related placements.

To be sure, experts say, the CFO role has never been easy—but for many, the pace since the pandemic has been nonstop. Back in 2020, as COVID-19 upended business operations, numerous CFOs were tasked with finding ways to keep their companies solvent. In the five years since, a cornucopia of crises has followed, with inflation, supply-chain overhauls, tariffs, and AI budgets all making demands on finance departments.

Along with the usual capital-allocation decisions, CFOs these days have a hand in areas like cybersecurity, digital transformation, investor communications, and even procurement. Jeff Constable, co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Global Financial Officers practice, recounts the daily routine of a recently retired CFO. She would get up daily at 4 AM to review sales reports; by 4:30 AM, she would send a note to the board and CEO summarizing the company’s performance. “It is a high-pressure role, and with that comes high turnover,” he says.

More recently, CFOs have become something of a scapegoat for poor corporate performance. If a strategy doesn’t appear to be working, the CEO might replace the CFO—a move that stakeholders inside and outside the organization could view positively. Even when the situation isn’t dire, investor pressure on CFOs has also increased. Because many firms aren’t growing fast organically, activist investors have pushed them to pursue aggressive stock repurchases to significantly boost their profitability. As a consequence, Constable says, CFOs have increased their share repurchases as “a defense mechanism.”

Record CEO departures play a factor as well, in a few ways. In some cases, the old CFO actually becomes the new CEO. Whoever the new boss is, the turnover at the top of corporate finance cascades to roles at lower levels, as new CFOs bring in their own controllers, treasurers, and financial analysts. “Boards and new chiefs are reshaping their finance benches,” Lambert says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Finance Recruiting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Beau Lambert
Senior Client Partner, Financial Officer Practice

Jeff Constable
Office Managing Partner, Senior Client Partner, Co-Leader Global Financial Officers Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Sales Effectiveness

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by