Modernizing the Military: Britain’s Bold Gamble

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 26, 2025

Modernizing the Military: Britain’s Bold Gamble

The threat from Russia—and the prospect of other hostile powers—has jolted the UK into action, with plans for more military spending. Will ambition overcome austerity?

When Sarah Brown graduated this year, she surprised her friends by enlisting in the British Army. Her father had done the same two decades earlier. Yet the force she joins looks nothing like his: smaller, leaner, but wired with technology that was the stuff of science fiction in his day. “It doesn’t feel like the Army he knew,” she says. “It feels like the future.”

For many decades, Britain was NATO’s heavyweight spender, pumping more than 4% of GDP into defense every year. But after 1991 the money slowed, and with it the size of the armed forces. Today troop numbers are at historic lows. Now, the government says the pendulum must swing back — modernization and deterrence are the watchwords. “Given the threats, we can’t afford to be unprepared,” says Edward Dinsmore, Korn Ferry’s senior client partner for organizational strategy. “This is about rebuilding readiness.”

That means more than just new kit. Britain is betting on deeper NATO integration — training, doctrine, and operations. “The wars of the future will be fought in coalitions,” Dinsmore explains. “That only works if our soldiers, sailors and aviators are learning the same lessons and fighting to the same playbook.” If NATO’s own institutions fall short, he says, “Britain has the clout to raise the bar for everyone.”

Yet money is the stumbling block. The government has pledged to raise defense spending as a share of GDP — but not until 2027. In the meantime, industry is stealing a march. “The private sector isn’t waiting for Whitehall,” says Simon Vaughan-Edwards, Korn Ferry’s senior client partner for defense and national security. “Capital is pouring into defense tech because investors know this is where the future lies.” London is also promising to rip up old procurement habits, cutting acquisition timelines from six years to two or less — a revolution in itself.

Perhaps the boldest shift is cultural. The government wants a “whole-of-society” approach — from schools teaching the value of defending democracy, to employers supporting reservists. The aim is to build a broad consensus around defense, one that could pay dividends in wartime. “The battle for talent won’t be about salaries,” Vaughan-Edwards says. “It will be about purpose.”

But experts say the gap between ambition and funding is wide. The UK economy has barely grown for years, and Treasury coffers are tight. Even if growth returns, the full cash surge won’t arrive until late this decade. That leaves years of vulnerability. “We’re trying to rearm in slow motion,” Vaughan-Edwards warns. “The risk is our adversaries move faster.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Executive Search capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Aerospace & Defense

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by