5 Ways to Bounce Back from a Big Work Mistake

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 28, 2025

5 Ways to Bounce Back from a Big Work Mistake

Almost half of workers will have at least one career blowup. How best to recover.

Have you ever missed a major deadline? Botched a massive product rollout? Lost a big sales account? We all make mistakes at work—and they’re sometimes major ones that can cost us professionally in the short term.

High-powered executives certainly aren’t perfect. According to a Harvard Business Review survey of 2,600 senior executives, nearly half, 45% experienced at least one career blowup. But mistakes, even big ones, are almost never career killers, experts say. For instance, some executives in the HBR study who admitted to making big mistakes eventually became top bosses. “When you make a mistake, the most important things to do are own it, address it head-on, and be constructive about what you’re going to do to fix it,” says Deborah Brown, a managing principal in Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Talent Consulting practice. Here are some thoughts on how to bounce back from a big mistake at work.

Be sincere in your apology.

Half-hearted apologies that imply someone else is at fault typically backfire. When possible, apologize in person and ask those directly affected what steps you can take to minimize any difficulties your error may have created for them. “Don’t find a way to blame others or a lack of resources,” Brown says.

When you do apologize, show empathy, says Debra Nunes, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. “Whatever you say, or whatever steps you take afterward, need to feel truthful and sincere,” she says.

Evaluate the extent of the harm.

Don’t compound a mistake by ignoring it, experts say. Make sure any review of a mistake involves talking with your colleagues about it. They might have feelings about it, particularly if it reflected poorly on the entire team. “Take the initiative to reach out and to understand what the person’s concern is, and then own your contribution to the problem,” says Nunes. Colleagues can give you a more complete picture about the impact of your mistake. While still taking full responsibility, see if you can enlist colleagues to help solve any problems the mistake created. “Ask if there is anything you can do together to address this issue and rectify the problem,” Nunes says.

Don’t dwell on mistakes.

“It doesn’t help to berate ourselves unless we’ve done something incredibly careless or unprofessional,” Brown says. Indeed, wallowing in a mistake could distract you, diminish your own performance, or make you prone to other mistakes. Own the error, take steps to rectify it, review any lessons you can take from it, and move on. “Overapologizing is a safe place for someone who lacks confidence,” Brown says.

Regain your boss's trust.

A mistake can snowball if you try to hide it or aren’t honest with your boss about your role in it, says Brian Bloom, Korn Ferry’s senior vice president of global benefits. “If you own your mistake and are honest about it, your manager should respond in kind and allow it to be a growth opportunity,” he says. Bosses can play an important role in diminishing a mistake’s impact and helping employees move past it. Indeed, employees believe a direct supervisor who frames failures and mistakes as growth opportunities is more effective.

Accept the consequences, and plan your next move.

Your mistake could have career consequences, such as the denial of a bonus or a promotion. You could be demoted, or even fired. But start planning your comeback. If you keep your job, document your successes going forward so you can prove to your boss that you’ve learned from your mistake. If it looks like your position is untenable, try negotiating a departure rather than allowing your employer to dictate when and how you leave. Don’t be shy about asking for severance pay and a decent recommendation; someone in the organization may feel badly about how things turned out and be willing to give you a break.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Deborah Brown
Managing Principal

Debra A. Nunes
Senior Client Partner

Brian Bloom
Senior Vice President, Global Benefits & Mobility Operations

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Business Skills

Coaching

Korn Ferry Career

Organizational Communications

Leadership & Professional Assessments