‘You Don’t Get Me’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 26, 2025

‘You Don’t Get Me’

A new study finds three-quarters of frontline workers don’t think senior leaders understand their day-to-day realities. Why a perceived “cluelessness” can be so damaging.

You see your work duties and your company in one way. Your manager sees them in another. To some degree, that’s always been a fact of the workplace—except that now, the gulf appears to be widening.

Indeed, a new study finds a substantial disconnect between the perceptions of senior leaders about their firms and the actual experiences of frontline workers. According to the study, more than three-quarters of frontline workers, 77% to be exact, feel senior leadership doesn’t understand what’s happening at their workplace on a day-to-day basis. In some industries—like retail, healthcare, and travel—the figure is 18% or less. “That’s an alarmingly high figure,” says Renee Whalen, North America consumer market leader for professional search at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, the data recalls the so-called “cluelessness” employees attributed to management during the aftermath of the pandemic, when studies routinely showed that the majority of them felt leaders didn’t understand their day-to-day struggles or value. Today, it’s issues like AI, tariffs, and remote work that are keeping executives from staying in contact with people on the ground. “Leaders are constantly pivoting or restructuring, because there is so much happening,” says Whalen.

Experts also attribute the disconnect to leaders’ change in tone when communicating around issues like layoffs, return-to-office mandates, employee productivity, and more. Gone, at least for the most part, are empathy and emotional intelligence—only 38% of CEOs and board directors in a recent Korn Ferry survey ranked emotional intelligence as a top leadership priority over the past three years, and only one in five are prioritizing employee engagement. It’s quite a reversal from just a few years ago, when firms were beefing up benefits packages with mental-health and well-being offerings and leaders were talking up mission and purposes and encouraging employees to share feedback in internal surveys, says Peter McDermott, head of the Corporate Affairs practice in North America for Korn Ferry. “Workers are less enabled to share their perspectives now,” he says.

For her part, Tamara Rodman, a senior client partner in the Culture, Change, and Communications practice at Korn Ferry, says that leaders, amid their rush to flatten organizational structures by removing multiple layers of middle management, lost a critical conduit to the pulse of frontline workers. Middle managers, says Rodman, are the proverbial ears to the ground keeping leaders apprised of how frontline workers are thinking and feeling. “That link is missing,” she says.

Given the pace of change in business, experts say that a lack of understanding between management and frontline workers, perceived or otherwise, could have reverberations far beyond talent issues. McDermott says the loss of trust and confidence in leaders could be devastating to culture. “Employees know what’s going on behind the scenes,” he says, “and they know if what leaders are saying is accurate or not.” More tangibly, a faltering relationship between leaders and workers could slow the adoption of AI tools or other innovations, as well as have a domino effect on cost projections, productivity, and more. “It could throw transformation efforts into disarray,” says Rodman.

As one measure, leaders can bridge the disconnect with frontline workers by drawing a clear line from corporate strategy to day-to-day work, says Karrin Randle, an associate client partner in the Culture, Change, and Communications practice at Korn Ferry. She also says that doubling down on internal communications—through engagement surveys, exit interviews, job-site reviews, and other channels—can foster a “multi-directional flow of information” and keep leaders connected to frontline workers. “In the same way that executives have to stay grounded in customer needs and client trends, they have to stay just as curious about employee needs,” says Randle.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Renee Whalen
Senior Client Partner, Market Leader

Peter McDermott
Senior Client Partner, Global Corporate Affairs and Investor Relations

Tamara Rodman
Senior Client Partner, Culture, Change & Communications

Karrin Randle
Associate Client Partner – Culture, Change & Communication

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Cultural Transformation

Employee Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by