The Mental-Health Day Dilemma

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|September 23, 2025

The Mental-Health Day Dilemma

With mental-health day usage up 300% from pre-pandemic levels, some bosses question the pattern.

After preparing all week for a Thursday presentation and delivering it without a hitch, the employee awoke on Friday feeling exhausted. Never mind that her team had a fall planning meeting at 10 AM. She sent an email to her boss at 7:35 AM to say that she was taking a mental-health day. Her boss, who had awakened early to plan for the meeting, cursed to himself when he received her message.

The employee’s behavior is the norm this year in corporate America, where employee use of mental-health days is up by 300% from pre-pandemic levels, according to ComPsych. “This is a tricky one,” says organizational psychologist Kendra Marion, vice president for global assessment services at Korn Ferry. “Mental-health days are provided with no explanation or doctor’s note required.”

Back before the pandemic, most employees rarely tapped into mental-health days, instead opting for PTO or sick days. But after two pandemic years of executives banging the “we care about your mental health” drum, compassion for mental-health challenges has surged, and employees are well aware of mental-health days—and not shy about using them. Part of the logistical problem, say HR experts, is that many employees now perceive mental-health days to be part of the allotted annual days off to which they are entitled, much like PTO and sick days. Yet bosses often find mental-health day use to be particularly challenging, because unlike planned vacations or preapproved arrangements to, say, care for a parent having surgery, employees often use mental-health days on short notice (or zero notice), leaving employers in the lurch.

Experts advise that executives pay close attention when use of mental-health days is high, because this may be an indicator of culture problems. When companies support healthy, productive cultures, workers are encouraged to bring their best selves to work each day; they feel like their presence matters, says organizational strategist Kim Waller, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. But this year, many firms are under extreme pressure to maximize profit and efficiencies, which has pushed taking care of people to the wayside. “Organizations that have strong, healthy cultures are probably not having this problem,” says Waller.

For firms facing high usage of mental-health days, organizational psychologists suggest investigating what’s driving the increase. Are employees feeling stressed out by world events? By their day-to-day workloads? Are some employees using mental-health days more than others—such as Gen Z workers maxing them out—which can skew corporate data? The question to answer, says Marion, is “what changes can we make so that employees don’t feel that they need to take a day just to be able to cope?”

Experts advise managers to clearly define employee expectations around mental-health days versus sick days versus PTO, and to always check with HR for guidance on both company policies and interacting with employees. “The most important thing is creating open dialogue with your team,” says Dennis Deans, global human resources business partner at Korn Ferry. The goals are for employees to feel that the organization supports them no matter what and to be comfortable saying so when they need to exercise a mental-health benefit—“though there’s no expectation that any employee should ever have to share,” notes Deans. One-on-one, managers can consider offering options such as the company’s EAP program.

Overall, mental-health day usage is far more than a matter of employees accruing additional days off. “It’s both a risk and an opportunity for employers,” says Marion.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Transformation capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kendra Marion
Vice President, Global Assessment Services

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by