Crying at Work: Another New Normal?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 7, 2025

Crying at Work: Another New Normal?

A new study finds that one in three UK workers cry at work. When spilling emotions helps.

The first year, the recent British graduate thought his job in finance was great. The London-based role was as advertised, and the pay was good.

But over time, the stress of the role ratcheted up higher and higher. One day it became too much. At his desk, he began to cry.

Weeping at work is now more common than it was a few decades ago, when it was often looked down upon. “There is definitely a generational change,” says Grant Duncan, Korn Ferry’s senior client partner, managing director and sector lead for consumer, EMEA. “Showing your emotions is more acceptable.”

Indeed, a recent survey across the United Kingdom found that one in three UK workers have cried at work over the previous 12 months. It was skewed by gender: 66% of those who cried were women, and 34% were men. “Women who cry at work often face a competence penalty, but men do not,” says Drew Hill, a senior client partner for Korn Ferry based in the firm's London office.

The study also found that older cohorts cried far less than younger ones. Thirty-four percent of those who cried belonged to Gen Z (the group born between 1995 and 2012), while a mere 7% were boomers.

When people are crying at work, savvy leaders need to know why. “Context is everything,” says Emma Cornwall, Korn Ferry’s senior client partner and solution lead for leadership and professional development in UK and Ireland. For instance, if there is a mass layoff at a company, she says, you would expect some people to be crying.

But what if the weeping occurs disproportionately in certain parts of the company? If there is no obvious reason for people to be crying, you need to find out what is happening, Cornwall says: “We as leaders need to be curious.” That means examining where people work and the nature of their relationships with supervisors. “If people are having an emotional response when nothing obvious has happened, then you need to pay attention,” she says. The boss may be disparaging his employees, which may call for some re-education.

Sometimes, people burn out because their roles are inherently challenging. Some of the most stressful include education, healthcare, finance, government, hospitality, and construction. The survey found that in the majority of cases, crying at work stemmed from two primary causes: Fifty-five percent of those who cried said stress was the root cause, and 27% pointed to burnout, itself a consequence of stress.

“Some big tech firms find emotional transparency is important in leadership,” Hill says. The most effective leaders tend to be less composed, he says. “They don’t have to cry, but emotional transparency builds authenticity with clients and colleagues.”

That’s where savvy leaders can make a positive difference. As humans observing people in distress, we have a natural response to want to stop it, Cornwall says. But that isn’t what is usually needed. “Try not to jump into solving it because you want the distress to stop,” she says. “Instead, say, ‘I am here, and I am here to talk about what is causing the crying. Maybe we could talk over coffee.’”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Employee Experience capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Grant Duncan
Senior Client Partner, Managing Director & Sector Lead for Consumer

Drew Hill
Senior Client Partner

Emma Cornwall
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by