Essentials: How to Get Ahead While Job Hugging

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 22, 2025

Essentials: How to Get Ahead While Job Hugging

Don’t just sit tight. Our experts say there are multiple ways to help propel your career in the short or long term.

For good reason, millions of workers feel as though they’re clinging to their jobs for dear life. Far fewer promotions are being handed out than there were two years ago. Raises are far lower too. Plus, seemingly every day a high-profile CEO announces that AI will change everyone’s jobs, reduce head count, or both.

Still, even when you’re feeling stuck, you can take productive steps to help propel your career in the short or long term. Some of these actions might seem so trivial that no one but you will notice them; others might have an immediate and visible impact. Together, they can make a huge difference. Indeed, in this economic environment, many companies want not only to identify the job huggers who are trying to be more productive, innovative, and problem-solving, but also to reward them. “We want our best talent to hug,” says Kevin Cashman, Korn Ferry’s vice chairman for CEO and enterprise leadership.

In this version of Korn Ferry’s Essentials, our experts offer some tips.

7 Ways to Write—and Send—Work Email

Making some small changes before you click “send” can significantly increase your effectiveness—and your colleagues’—at work.

How to Defuse a Tense Work Situation

Managers spend one-quarter of their time resolving conflicts, including the ones they themselves are involved in.

5 Tips for Picking the Right Training Course

Skills-training and certificate programs are expected to balloon into a $3 billion business by decade’s end. Deciding which courses to take is a challenge.

Turning Tough Feedback into Action: 4 Ways

With managers under increasing pressure to boost productivity, employees are facing tougher performance reviews.

5 Ways to Become a ‘Career Daredevil’

When the market quivers, experts say that bold actions may actually be the best move for job candidates and career climbers.

5 Ways to Make a Fast Impact at Work

More and more often, bosses are demanding results amid fast-moving shifts. How to show you’re making progress.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Business Skills

Coaching

Korn Ferry Career

Organizational Communications

Career Transition & Outplacement

Leadership & Professional Assessments

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by