The Hottest Job in 2032? They’re Out of Work Now.

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|September 23, 2025

The Hottest Job in 2032? They’re Out of Work Now.

In an unexpected twist, a shortage of 2.9 million managers is expected by 2032. Are firms moving too fast to remove them?

It’s been the one job that nobody looking for job security has wanted lately. Indeed, across many industries, firms worldwide have been cutting managers by the ten of thousands, either belittling them as unnecessary middle people or arguing that flatter organizational hierarchies perform better.

But has the corporate world gone too far? A surprising study from the Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce projects managers to be among the most sought-after roles by 2032. According to the new report on skills shortages, firms are expected to face a shortage of 2.9 million managers—a deficit that trumps other much-discussed shortages, such as those affecting nurses (362,000), teachers (611,000), and engineers (210,000). This comes at a time when firms are holding off on hiring for many entry-level jobs, which is also limiting the pipeline of future managers. “If most companies do this, we’re not going to be developing managers,” says HR expert Ron Porter, senior partner at Korn Ferry. “That leads to a talent war.”

Talent wars are rarely good for businesses: When fewer candidates are available, compensation rises and talent quality drops. “Supply is shallow, and people are often pushed into jobs a couple of years before they’re actually ready,” says Porter. Companies have been openly trimming their managers since the pandemic; recently, some major firms announced cuts of 20%.

“Managers have been an easy target,” says Iktimal Daneshvar, EMEA vice president for RPO at Korn Ferry. Middle managers are typically plentiful, and also well-compensated enough that axing them brings corporate savings. As a result, managers—of the still employed variety—are now notably less numerous: US public companies cut their middle-managers by 6.1% as of the end of last year, according to figures from employment-data company Live Data Technologies. Experts say that the manager pipeline is further constricted by uncertainty, which is leading companies to press pause on hiring incoming employees, especially in roles that AI might soon augment or replace. Unemployment rates for young workers (ages 22 to 27) currently stand at 7.4%, which is nearly double the overall unemployment rate for all workers of 4.0%.

Workplace watchers still encourage workers to pursue management careers, though not necessarily through the college or business-school degree programs that are currently available to them. With AI looming, experts say, the roles of future managers, not to mention their staff, are likely to change drastically in the next year or two. “I think in the future, these roles will require smarts for which current education programs will not equip people,” says Cheryl D’Cruz-Young, senior client partner in the Global Energy practice at Korn Ferry.

The Georgetown study, of course, is looking many years ahead. Even amid the uncertainty around management, experts still advise taking the plunge. “If it’s something you have a passion for,” says Porter. “Standouts are always in demand.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ronald Porter
Senior Partner

Iktimal Daneshvar
Vice President, Senior Client Partner, Recruitment Process Outsourcing (RPO) , EMEA

Cheryl D’Cruz-Young
Senior Client Partner, Sustainability & Global Energy

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Consumer Products

Retail

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by