Essentials: Breaking Through a Frozen Job Market

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 15, 2025

Essentials: Breaking Through a Frozen Job Market

There are 7 million-plus open roles in the US alone, and experts say savvy candidates are making the right moves to land those roles.

It’s easy to feel dazed and confused in the current job market. The number of open roles has declined by 40% from three years ago, and many companies that have them aren’t in a rush to fill them. Plus, the process of finding, applying, and interviewing for a job seems so much more complicated than it did a few years ago.

Still, there are 7 million-plus open roles in the US alone, and candidates who are diligent and patient can find one they want with compensation they can live with. A few of the tips suggested below could help too. In this version of Korn Ferry’s Essentials, our experts highlight the things to do—and avoid—to make a modern job search easier.

5 Résumé Resolutions for Right Now

The average time needed to find a job is half a year. Experts say candidates need to revamp this document to squeeze past automated job trackers and human hiring managers.

5 ‘Skills’ to Hone for a Job Interview

The competition to even land an interview is getting tougher in 2025. “Sometimes, great candidates just don’t interview well.”

5 Tips for Giving off the Right Interview Vibes

Poor chemistry, going off script, or bad vibes can derail an interview. Our experts share their advice for creating a better atmosphere.

6 Questions to Ask the Job Interviewer

Being curious about a potential employer may not only improve your chances of landing the role, but also help you decide whether you want to take it.

5 Ways to Land a New Role at Your Company

Many people who resolved to find a new job at the beginning of the year are still searching. But there’s one place they may have overlooked: their own companies.

5 Ways to Self-Improve While Unemployed

Job hunters should expect long waits to find a role—and use that time to do more than search.

The Best Types of Job References

In a difficult job market, our experts explain which testimonials you really need.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Business Skills

Coaching

Korn Ferry Career

Organizational Communications

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by