Teamwork Theater

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|October 6, 2025

Teamwork Theater

Teams are how things get done, but Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison argues that they all need strong leaders guiding them to really excel.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

Thirty minutes… five streaming options. Rotten Tomatoes reviews referenced readily and even AI at our fingertips. It was a Friday night, and my family still could not come to a consensus on which movie to watch.

Everyone had a voice and a vote, and consensus was required.

Romcom? “Nah, too predictable.” Drama? “Not interested.” Action? “Too intense.” Biopic? “Kind of long.” Something in the top ten? “Really? These are the top 10 everybody is watching right now?”

The evening was waning fast—and so was everyone’s patience. In the end, after multiple options were offered, we all agreed to compromise. We found a show that was acceptable to everyone, but the first choice of no one. A movie that was pleasantly … mediocre.

In trying to please everybody, nobody was really happy. We just kind of settled.

It’s an all-too-familiar storyline, in both life and leadership. As counterintuitive as it seems, too often teams can actually become overly participative. The dynamic—more people, more meetings, more names added to that email string, more group thinking—masquerades as individual accountability and ownership of an outcome.

So, everyone… and no one… is responsible. It’s a process that leads to a product that fails to perform.

Make no mistake, teams are how we get things done. And yes, that takes shared purpose, overarching goals, and collective genius. But between the lines, teams can lose context and lack clarity.

So, how can we as leaders bring people together in teams that are more efficient and effective? Here are a few thoughts.

Explicit, not implicit. As our firm’s research shows, many teams falter because decision-making is implicit rather than explicit. When roles and responsibilities aren’t clear, consensus can become a cover for ambiguity.

Time is the most precious commodity for all of us. That’s why the most successful leaders take the B.L.U.F. (bottom line up-front) approach. It explicitly focuses on what needs to be done, who is going to do it and by when.

Accountability vs. Responsibility. Responsibility is only in the present. Accountability, by contrast, is longer lasting—it spans results of the past to outcomes in the future. When the stakes are high, it’s especially difficult to make the tough calls and accept the consequences. But that’s what accountability is all about—the ability to say, “Whatever the outcome, I own it.”

I can still remember that day—the crack of the bat when one of my friends pulverized the baseball, then the reverberating crash of a window being shattered. Some scattered, not wanting to get caught. Others were just too scared to move. When the adults asked us what happened, that’s when shoulders started to shrug. Wasn’t me….

“Let’s have a meeting!” Even with the best of intentions, the default is often to have yet another meeting—and bring in everyone and anyone. But more is sometimes less—not just diminishing returns, but actually detrimental to the outcome.

Whenever a meeting is called, the first question should be why. Is it informational, decision-making, discovery, or brainstorming? Or is it just to connect with others? Not all meetings are the same! Brainstorms are all blue skies with no bad ideas—and more participants means more opportunities to bounce off ideas. Decision-making, on the other hand, is all about figuring out what actions everyone needs to take—and that’s better in small groups.

When the why is understood, the who naturally follows.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by