Buying High: Stock Buybacks Soar

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 26, 2025

Buying High: Stock Buybacks Soar

Firms are nearing a new record in stock buybacks this year. Why now, when stock prices are so high?

When in doubt, just buy back stock.

That’s what a majority of big-company finance executives and CEOs have decided in 2025. Amid near-record stock-market highs and economic uncertainty, US firms have announced nearly $1 trillion worth of stock buybacks so far in 2025, the best start to a year on record, according to data going back to 1982. The all-time high for purchases in a year is $1.1 trillion, set in 2022. It’s a milestone that, if conditions hold, firms likely will break.

On the surface, at least, the buybacks look like an expensive move, with the stock market at or near record highs. But experts say alternatives, such as letting a company’s cash sit unused, can backfire by attracting activist investors. Meanwhile, turning to mergers means facing the same issue: high stock valuations. By buying back stock, company leaders can increase the firm’s earnings per share, making its outstanding shares more valuable.

“In today’s market, it’s one of the most direct levers to support earnings per share and keep valuations steady when predictability is what investors are rewarding,” says Beau Lambert, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Financial Officer Center of Expertise. And when a company increases buybacks, that often puts pressure on its rivals to do the same, he says.

While big tech and financial firms are the biggest purchasers of their own stock—with 20 such companies accounting for nearly half of this year’s announced repurchases—they’re certainly not alone. Indeed, 384 companies reported new buybacks of at least $5 million in the first three months of the year. Part of what’s motivating them, experts say, are their own growth prospects in today’s extremely uncertain environment. Organic growth is hard to find, and major uncertainty persists around trade policies, inflation, and AI; in this climate, it can be difficult not only to determine the cost of producing new goods (or where to produce them), but also to forecast demand. While leaders could conceivably spend the cash on acquisitions, the valuations of other companies are sky-high right now. “Buybacks are generally being evaluated against other, often really expensive M&A alternatives,” says Jeff Constable, co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Global Financial Officers practice.

Companies often will increase their stock buybacks when they’re flush with cash—typically when the market in general, and their own stock in particular, are at historically high valuations. Indeed, over the last seven years (with the exception of 2018), the value of share repurchases has moved in near-direct correlation with that of the broader stock market. “It often looks like they are buying high rather than acting as value investors,” says Alan Guarino, vice chairman of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice.

But not spending the cash on stock has its own drawbacks. If company leaders opt to let the cash sit (and earn minimal returns), they can be accused of having a “lazy” balance sheet, which in turn can attract activist investors, Guarino says. And while companies could return excess cash to shareholders by substantially increasing higher dividend payouts, many have been loath to do so. Dividends aren’t as tax efficient as buybacks. Plus, even if firms can afford higher dividend payouts now, an economic downturn could make it difficult for them to honor those commitments later—and investors like few things less than a company cutting its dividend.

Lambert says that the best finance leaders are positioning their share repurchases as part of a balanced approach to capital allocation that also includes organic reinvestment, M&A, and balance-sheet management. “It is when buybacks become the whole story that it raises questions,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Beau Lambert
Senior Client Partner, Financial Officer Practice

Jeff Constable
Office Managing Partner, Senior Client Partner, Co-Leader Global Financial Officers Practice

Alan Guarino
Vice Chairman, CEO and Board Services

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments

High Performing Executive Teams

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by