Going Shopping? You Probably Don’t Count

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|September 29, 2025

Going Shopping? You Probably Don’t Count

But these three million specific customers do, as retailers increasingly focus on a tiny band of high spenders. Does everyone else feel left out?

Remember the days when you’d open your mailbox to find a pile of flyers from stores as diverse as Williams Sonoma, Bath & Body Works, Auntie Anne’s and Claire’s? Sure, the flyers were annoying, but the ads were reassuringly inclusive.

Enter today’s retail-loyalty programs, most of which probably—simply put—don’t care about you. National retailers are increasingly discovering that most of their profits come from fewer than 10 million shoppers (often more like 3 to 7 million) and are finding it profitable to focus their attention on them. Not on you. “There’s so much efficiency in reaching the people they want,” says Jennifer Rosenberg, a principal in the Global Marketing Officers practice at Korn Ferry. Sure, they’ll miss some potential shoppers, she says, but “retailers don’t need to be all things to all people.”

Retail mass marketing has been floundering for a couple of decades now, with marketers’ efforts falling flat via diverse mediums including snail mail, email, TV, digital ads, radio, and newspapers. Today’s consumers tend to prefer a genuine relationship with a brand, which is why 92% belong to at least one loyalty program, and half belong to five or more, according to data from EY. “The customer wants to feel that a retailer knows them,” says retail expert Denise Kramp, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. And the retailer wants to think in terms of the long haul, building lifetime loyalty and value with customers who will become more engaged over time.

Though the world of retail loyalty would seem to be exclusive, it’s actually quite competitive—especially for customers who order regularly from multiple retailers. Loyalty programs center around constantly creating enticing reasons to shop, such as new product drops, sales, or in-store events. “Consumers are getting these promotions from everyone they order from,” says Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. It’s a tricky calculus for retailers, who need loyalists to buy products at full price, so promotions often involve a discount for buying three at a time, or some other kind of package deal.

Loyalty programs come with great risks for the retailer: Potential shoppers outside loyalty programs can easily feel left out. And firms fear they might accidentally alienate their most valuable customers. The challenge is to make shopping easy, seamless, and engaging without overburdening or annoying consumers, who dislike receiving too many communications and can experience a phenomenon known as “loyalty fatigue.” “After being bombarded, people just don’t open those emails anymore,” says Rowley.

Another challenge is to make sure that the right ads reach the right shoppers. Anyone with an email address likely receives multiple email ads intended for others every day, which suggests that retailers still haven’t gotten this right. Retail firms are turning to the expertise of consulting companies to help them build customer relationship-management systems, identify customers, send offers, and analyze impact. “If you’re gonna do it, you gotta get it right,” says Rosenberg.

AI will soon make it easier for marketers to personalize their offers and promotion frequency. In the meantime, many marketing teams have found outreach to a smaller group to be much more manageable and pleasant than cold calling: The marketer’s role essentially becomes to preach to the converted—to encourage a targeted group that is already interested. “That’s the name of the game today, more than ever before,” says Rosenberg.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Transformation capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jennifer Rosenberg
Principal, Global Marketing Officers Practice

Denise Kramp
Senior Client Partner

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Consumer Products

Retail

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by