The C-Suite Executives Watching Their Backs

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 19, 2025

The C-Suite Executives Watching Their Backs

Chief commercial and revenue officers are being replaced left and right this year. Why are firms so quick to swap out the person most responsible for top-line growth?

It’s not often that one can lump an investor-relations-software firm, an ad agency, a medical-device maker, a pharmacy, and an egg producer in the same category. But over the last couple of months, companies in each of these areas have swapped out their chief revenue officers. As top-line growth slows considerably across a multitude of industries, organizations are looking for anyone who can spark more of it.

The shuffling puts a spotlight on the senior executive tasked with growing sales, known variously as a chief revenue officer or chief commercial officer. The role, which reports directly to the CEO, already has the shortest tenure in the C-suite, at barely two years, according to Harvard Business Review—that’s less than half of a chief marketing officer’s average tenure and not even one-third of a CEO’s. Right now, however, intense performance pressure and, in some cases, unrealistic growth expectations are making the role even tougher, says Stephanie Broadright, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in recruiting revenue leaders. “New executives are being asked to make a big impact in ninety to one hundred days," she says. "No one hits pause to make a new business strategy.”

Experts point out the recent struggles of many companies in consumer packaged goods (CPG)—an industry that historically has grown in virtually any economic environment—as emblematic of growth problems in general. Even when they aren’t selling more units, these firms often can grow by successfully raising prices. In the first quarter of 2023, for instance, volumes at CPG firms fell slightly from a year earlier, but top-line revenues grew nearly 11%—above even an elevated rate of inflation, according to analysis by S&P Capital IQ and Bain—thanks to price increases.

Fast-forward to today, however, and many firms are unable to raise prices even as volumes continue to decline. In the first quarter of 2025, top-line revenues grew only 1.6% year-over-year, below the rate of inflation. At the same time, tariffs are increasing costs and consumer preferences are changing in unanticipated ways. “It’s a trifecta of headwinds,” says Torrey Foster, managing partner for Korn Ferry’s North American Consumer Markets practice.

Investors—both public shareholders and private-equity owners—are losing patience, and are putting pressure on CEOs, as well as on the executives directly responsible for generating revenues. Over the last several months, a well-known soup company, two massive cereal firms, a major manufacturer of aluminum foil and trash bags, and a big global winemaker have all replaced their chief revenue or chief commercial officers. Other firms have replaced their CEOs, who in turn have brought in new chief revenue executives. “Many firms are looking for the next generation of leaders to get them back to growth,” says Peri Hansen, sector leader of Korn Ferry’s North America Consumer Products sector and leader of its North America Marketing Officers practice.

Boards will commonly fire the CRO when growth is challenged, but experts say there’s no guarantee that the new executive will make a positive difference. In the early 2020s, when mid- and large-sized software firms swapped out their chief revenue officers, 62% saw revenue growth decline or remain flat in the subsequent fiscal year, according to research done by business consultant SBI Growth Advisory. Changes in commercial leadership can lead to other challenges, such as scuttled sales deals and increased employee turnover, Broadright says.

When firms do make a switch, new executives often face a steep learning curve. They must quickly determine whether a lack of growth stems from issues that are internal (such as a suboptimal sales team or marketing strategy) or external (such as economic headwinds or a change in customer tastes). Since the new executive is under a lot of pressure to get a big win early, they may fall back on what’s been successful in the past, even if it’s not appropriate to the specific challenge they’re facing. “It can be throwing darts against the wall in a short period of time,” Broadright says.

Experts say that a new chief revenue executive has to be agile, good at scenario planning, and particularly creative. These days, a lack of innovation is a significant problem at organizations, and executives need to marshal a company’s ability to systematically generate new products and services. “They need to be scientific about approaching problems, versus thinking they can just sell their way through this one,” Broadright says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Transformation capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Stephanie Broadright
Senior Client Partner

Torrey N. Foster, Jr.
Vice Chairman, Consumer Markets, CEO & Board Services & Managing Partner, North American Consumer Markets

Peri Hansen
Senior Client Partner, Sector Leader, Consumer Products, North America, Leader, Marketing Officers Practice, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Sales Effectiveness

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by