It’s No Big Deal

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 27, 2026

It’s No Big Deal

From wars to market drops, high-impact events have become the new norm in global business. Can leaders shrug off disruptions?

Trillion-dollar market swings. Oil around $100 per barrel. Huge data breaches. Major wars. Cities cloaked in wildfire smoke. Not even five years ago in the US, any of these would have been front-page events warranting a supportive note from the CEO to employees and stakeholders. But in 2026, experts say the world, and business, have started to look at all this… with a shrug.

In the aughts, academic Nassim Taleb popularized the term black swan event to refer to rare and unpredictable happenings. Now, leaders must confront black swan events and any number of other disruptions every few months—then try to carry on as if everything is, well, normal. “There’s definitely been a shift,” says Marnix Boorsma, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s CFO and Global Energy practices. During the pandemic, he says, virtually every major event triggered what he calls the “great corporate email reflex.”

To be sure, black swan events have always existed. (The term gets its name from the 1600s discovery of black swans in Australia, which exploded the European belief that all swans were white.) These unpredictable, impactful events were typically treated as shocking outliers that required emergency response. But they’ve become so frequent in recent years that leaders are now treating everything from wars to stock crashes as “gray swan” events: i.e., they’re not entirely predictable, but they’re still consequential—and they can be absorbed without drastic changes in strategy or operations.

For example, during the 1980s, major weather disasters happened every 82 days on average, compared with every 19 days over the last 10 years, according to government stats. Similarly, roughly nine major data breaches are reported daily in the US—a category that didn’t even exist in the early aughts. In the last few years, more and more executives have stopped commenting. “So many difficult and terrible occurrences have become so normalized,” says Karen Huang, senior director for search assessment at Korn Ferry. “Leaders can’t possibly comment on all of them.”

Companies have also begun to realize that strong reactions—whether in the form of messaging or logistical changes—can be risky. The tariff announcements in 2025 were among the last major events to generate a widespread reaction from the business world. Firms spent millions relocating foreign operations, or making plans to, only for courts to strike down the price increases or countries to renegotiate them. Now, many leaders choose to stay mum in the face of dramatic events. “Meaningful statements and commentary are often not getting made by people in positions of authority and power,” says Jeff Constable, office managing partner for Korn Ferry in New York. In this new gray swan environment, he says, firm leaders and employees must learn measured ways of handling ongoing disruptive events as part of a broader long-term strategy. For the leader, “it’s part of an ongoing conversation over a long period of time, versus trying to be overly heroic in a single, unique moment,” says Constable.

To be sure, experts do advise communicating directly with employees during high-pressure events, especially in situations that present a direct risk to their well-being, such as a war in their region or the loss of a major contract that might result in corporate shifts. Overall, the best tone to take is one of steadiness and calm orientation—a tone which, in and of itself, can help stakeholders cope. In a world of reactivity, Boorsma says, “steadiness stands out more than speeches do.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Marnix Boorsma
Senior Client Partner

Karen H.C. Huang, Ph.D.
Senior Director, Search Assessment, Atlanta, Miami, Northern Virginia, Washington DC,

Jeff Constable
Office Managing Partner, Senior Client Partner, Co-Leader Global Financial Officers Practice

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by