Assigned More Work? How to Handle the Bigger Load

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 17, 2025

Assigned More Work? How to Handle the Bigger Load

Up and down the corporate ladder, employees are being asked to take on more responsibilities. Here are some tips to know beforehand.

These days, workers say some bosses are asking them to do extra work more often than the office copier runs out of paper. Indeed, a whopping 77% of employees say they take on tasks outside their job description at least weekly, according to a 2024 survey by LiveCareer, a résumé-builder website.

To be sure, much is this is happening because organizations are pushing to remove management layers, freeze payrolls, or both. Individual contributors are being asked to take on the duties of now-departed colleagues. Managers are being tasked with supervising more people. Even C-suite executives are being asked to do more. According to a recent survey, 82% of CFOs said they took on responsibilities above and beyond their purview over the last two years. In most cases, these extra responsibilities are being doled out without a promotion.

Generally, experts say it’s a good idea to be amenable to new responsibilities. “It can reinforce your position, role, and value in the organization,” says Lilly Tran, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Professional Search Industrial practice. If you consider the following questions first, you’ll make the work more worthwhile.

What might be the expected outcome or goal?

Workers should understand why a task needs to be done and how important it is to the organization. Sometimes the answer will be obvious: For example, when a managing director quits, the department will need another managing director to take on their former clients. At other times the answer will be more nebulous, at which point it’s fair to ask how important these new tasks are relative to your current responsibilities.

Can this help my future growth?

According to a recent Korn Ferry survey, millennial and Gen-Z workers prioritize learning opportunities and getting ahead professionally. Gen Xers also prioritize career advancement, but emphasize compensation as a top priority. They’ll want to know if their new duties will eventually lead to a raise or promotion. Even if it won’t, they might consider requesting career-development perks, such as mentorship, training, and exposure to leaders in the organization, says Val Olson, a career and leadership coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

What resources are needed?

The new duties might require not only specific skills, of course, but also other things: new software, an introduction to people in other departments, or even AI tools. Make sure to ask for help—including, when appropriate, a coach. “Being asked to do more with less is a really common situation right now,” says Flo Falayi, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. He says that a coach can help a person with new additional responsibilities to manage their time and delegate more effectively.

Why me?

This question is not meant to sound defensive or negative. “I recommend stating that you are always happy to help,” says Michaela Buttler, a Korn Ferry senior consultant. But for many employees, it’s reassuring to know that the boss isn’t just randomly giving them more work. If the extra responsibilities seem too complex, it’s also fair to ask whether there are others whose skills, competencies, and interests make them better suited to take on these responsibilities.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Lilly Tran
Senior Client Partner, Sector Leader, Industrial, Energy & Energy Transition, Co-Leader, ESG & Sustainability

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Flo Falayi
Senior Client Partner, Advisory Practice

Michaela Buttler

Consultant, Career Transition Services

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by