5 Ways for Jobless Grads to Gain Skills

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 27, 2026

5 Ways for Jobless Grads to Gain Skills

New college graduates are struggling to find work. How can they make themselves more professionally attractive when the market turns?

It would be great if every recent college graduate could find work in their chosen field. But the harsh reality is that it isn’t going to happen.

This summer, many graduates are more likely to see their careers getting off to a slow start. The current unemployment rate of 7.6% for people between the ages of 20 and 24 is more than 50% higher than it is for the overall population. The volatility around the economy, inflation, and the promise of AI is prompting firms to institute hiring freezes and lay off staff. For graduates, it seems more like winter is coming than summer. “Not finding a job right away and having a big change in your day-to-day life can be very challenging,” says Emily Gianunzio, a Korn Ferry research analyst.

Still, experts say unemployed graduates can use this time to work on making themselves more attractive to firms and recruiters when hiring picks up again. There are, of course, countless online and in-person courses graduates can take to obtain additional licenses and certifications. But for those who are sick of sitting in class, we surveyed our experts for their best advice on how recent graduates can obtain skills and make themselves more marketable without a job this summer. Here’s what they said.

Build Your professional network.

Networking is the single most important skill—and it is indeed a skill—for professionals of any age. But it is especially important for new grads trying to get an inside track in their chosen field. Reaching out to alumni in your field is a good place to start, says Jennifer Zamora, a Korn Ferry senior principal and career coach. But don’t stop there. Zamora advises seeking a mix of networking opportunities, from one-on-one connections to group events to conferences and seminars. “Conversations can lead to mentorships, referrals, or even project-specific opportunities,” says Zamora.

Experiment with AI.

There’s no getting around it: Anyone entering the workforce today needs to have at least some familiarity with AI tools and apps. And as numerous studies show, the vast majority of employees are learning and using AI on their own, without formal training from their firms or leaders. Whether you’re in a tech-related field or not, Zamora advises exploring AI tools relevant to your industry. “AI is becoming a core career skill,” she says. “Identify accessible ways to start building fluency in how AI is used in your field and how you can work alongside it.”

Tap into the gig economy.

Freelancing, volunteering, short-term projects, and even starting your own side hustle are all ways to build skills and gain experience in lieu of a traditional job. They are also low-risk endeavors for firms, says David Meintrup, a Korn Ferry career coach. If the goal is to land a sales role, he says, offer to do work for a local small business that is commission only. Or better yet, use social media to launch your own small business. If you are looking to build data analysis or user experience skills, try reaching out to nonprofits that might not have the budget to hire people for that kind of work. “These real-world experiences give new grads the chance to prove themselves and put a title on their résumés,” says Meintrup.

Promote your efforts publicly.

Don’t be shy about sharing what you’re learning or doing to build your skills. That in and of itself is a skill. Leverage social media to build an audience and grow your network. Join industry-specific communities to gain insights into what others are working on or experiencing and share yours as well. But remember that potential employers and colleagues are reading what you are posting. Stay positive, proactive, and engaged, says Zamora. “Sharing what you are doing and learning can help build your professional brand and help give employers a taste of what you would be like to work with,” she says.

Learn the art of self-care.

It doesn’t sound like a skill, but given the elevated rates of anxiety, burnout, disengagement, and stress in the workplace, one of the most overlooked competencies, to use corporate jargon, is self-care. Go to the gym. Take a walk every day. Meditate. Whatever gets you into a calm and positive state of mind. Gianunzio likens self-care to finding meaning and purpose in work in the sense that it improves engagement, productivity, and discretionary energy. “Taking time to improve yourself in ways that aren’t necessarily professional in nature could be just as beneficial to finding a job,” she says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jennifer Zamora
Senior Principal

David Meintrup
Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

AI in the Workplace

AI-Ready Workforce

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

Career Transition & Outplacement

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by