5 Career Tips for Gen Zers

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 26, 2025

5 Career Tips for Gen Zers

Unemployment is high for this group, and AI is looming. But it’s never too early to chart a career path.

Every generation has its unique challenges when it enters the workforce, and Gen Z, the current crop of newbies, is no different. Those who already have jobs often work outside traditional offices and without face-to-face access to mentors, which can make them more isolated than young people in prior generations. “Recent college graduates are not having as many conversations with professionals, and therefore often operate in a vacuum,” says Korn Ferry Advance career coach David Meintrup. In many cases, the older workers they interact with may seem worn down, which helps explain why an overwhelming number of Gen-Z workers say they never want to become ⁠managers.

It’s worse for those looking for work. The job market is particularly bad for young people, with unemployment at 8.5%—more than double the overall unemployment rate—for college graduates between ages 20 and 24. Meanwhile, the founders of AI companies are proclaiming that the technology will wipe out half of all entry-level white-collar jobs within the next five years.

If any generation could use some career advice, it’s Gen Z. Indeed, three-quarters of Gen Zers say they get career advice from social media, and a quarter of them say they’ve sought out, and followed, career tips from ChatGPT. We thought Korn Ferry’s experts could do a little better, so we canvassed them for tips—both evergreen thoughts that can apply to any group of young people, and also some Gen Z-specific advice.

Practice what you want to do.

With the job market what it is, getting a job in the field you specifically want can be really hard. Experts advise finding nontraditional ways to develop the skills you want. For example, if you want a job in investment management but can only find a role in accounting, experts suggest focusing on your 401(k). Make it a model portfolio that maximizes returns and minimizes risks. That portfolio now becomes something to talk about—and potentially share—during a future job interview with investment managers. “Experience is a good teacher. Go get some,” says Korn Ferry managing partner Kate Shattuck.

Identify your strengths and improve your weaknesses.

“Get good at something first—ideally something hard, useful, and in demand,” says Marnix Boorsma, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Amsterdam office. Of course, if Gen Zers are anything like the generations that preceded them, they might not know yet what exactly they’re good at. Ask for feedback on your work. Find out what you’re doing well, and where you can improve. Don’t take negative feedback personally—use it to improve your performance.

Treat your professional network like your social network.

Plenty of Gen Zers spend hours every day trying to expand their social lives. They spend far less time doing the same for their professional contacts. It’s those professional contacts, not a blanket emailing of 100 résumés, that will lead to professional opportunities. Attend career fairs, join industry-related LinkedIn groups, connect with alumni, and follow thought leaders in your field.

Don’t be passive, either. Use professional sites such as LinkedIn to scout older professionals who have jobs that interest you, then drop them a line, asking if they have a few minutes to talk about their careers. Then ask them about the experiences that got them to where they are now, as well as the skills they’ve needed to keep developing. After each conversation, always send a thank-you note and ask if you can follow up from time to time. “Be really intentional,” says Renee Wahlen, Korn Ferry’s North America consumer market leader.

Be a better speaker… and listener.

Gen Zers admit it: They’re not the best communicators. In a 2023 poll, 65% of them said they struggle to make conversation with colleagues. That’s a problem, experts say, since poor interpersonal skills can lead to misunderstandings and hinder performance on the job. It can be difficult to initiate conversations and ask questions, but these are important ways to establish common ground with colleagues.

Listening is as important as speaking. Experts say Gen Zers should stay focused on what people are saying around them, suspend judgment, and try to understand different perspectives. By developing these skills, Gen-Z employees can make more positive first impressions, improve professional relationships, and burnish their professional reputations.

Be patient.

Gen Xers weren’t patient when they entered the workforce. Millennials certainly weren’t either. Now Gen Zers are champing at the bit, too, wanting to change the world and make everything perfect instantly. Complicating matters is the fact that many Gen Zers grew up with food, photos, music, and nearly anything else they wanted right at their fingertips. Earlier generations found out the working world doesn’t function that way; Gen Zers are starting to figure that one out, too. “It’s not all about instant gratification,” says Dennis Deans, Korn Ferry’s global human resources business partner. A successful career takes decades. Instead of asking, “Why don’t I have this perfect job now?”, ask “What skills and experiences can I start acquiring to get a job I really want?”

Sure, there’s value in trying to speed things up, but experts say there’s also value in slowing down and taking time to reflect on a problem. Indeed, leadership coaches routinely stress that taking a pause leads to far better decision-making. Prioritizing also can help build patience.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

David Meintrup
Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

Marnix Boorsma
Senior Client Partner

Renee Whalen
Senior Client Partner, Market Leader

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career