The Secrets to Becoming an Influential Board Member

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|July 2, 2025

The Secrets to Becoming an Influential Board Member

Inside the push to rank director effectiveness and measure how well they are keeping up their end of the bargain.

Key takeaways

How top board members operate and stand out
Four characteristics that can help directors thrive
How to balance director tenure, experience, and committee commitments

Four Traits of Top Board Members

For years, there was nothing more subjective than measuring board members: How did they get along with people? How many boards did they serve on? Did they have a decent golf game?

But as stakeholder demands of board members have risen in recent years, and the responsibilities of directors have widened, new metrics of how to measure the effectiveness and influence of board members are cropping up. Take, for example, a recent ranking by The Wall Street Journal of the top corporate board members, which was based on 18 indicators ranging from the number of boards they serve on to if they’ve been a CEO.

At the same time, many companies are clamoring to know how effective their boards are. While many boards conduct annual self-assessments, experts say stakeholders are asking for deeper evaluations that rate their strategic alignment, meeting effectiveness, and decision-making skills. Indeed, Korn Ferry’s annual study on board evaluations show that while improving, many boards still don't bring in a third party and simply self-assess. “On a basic level, boards are evaluated on if they can function productively together,” says David Dotlich, president and senior partner at Korn Ferry. “Beyond that, many boards don’t reflect on how they’re doing, and that’s a mistake.” Below, we break down some of the traits of successful directors.

Tenure and Timing

One of the most scrutinized traits of late is how long board members serve. It takes most board members a good one to two years to get their bearings, and many experts say the sweet spot for board tenure is from five to 11 years. Korn Ferry’s own data show the average tenure for board directors is about eight years. But when directors spend too long on a board "they become part of the establishment and cease to challenge as much,” Dotlich says.

To help combat long-serving directors and encourage regular board refreshment, some companies—albeit not many—are instituting term limits. According to the Conference Board, less than 10% of all S&P 500 firms have such limits.

And when it comes to the number of boards a director serves on, the exact number can be highly contextual. "If you’re a CEO or CFO of an active public company you probably can only take on one board,” says Scott Atkinson, senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s CEO and Board practice. "If you're a retired executive, it could be more.”

Committee Commitments

Another significant indicator for how well a director will perform is how many and which committees board members serve on. Typically, the compensation committee and governance committee hold the most weight and are the most desirable ones. "In most cases less is more,” Atkinson says. "If you're on four boards and six committees there's no way you can have time to be truly effective.”

Indeed, in the WSJ ranking, directors who sat on all three committees were docked for too much involvement. The risk and compliance solutions firm Diligent noted that "best practices suggest that board directors shouldn’t serve on more than two committees in the interest of being committed and effective.”

It’s also important for directors to think about how they get information. "Are they only getting information fed to them by management or are they also developing their own relationships with employees to understand what's really going on?” Dotlich asks.

CEO Experience

As the board's remit has morphed into taking on a more active, strategic role—particularly for the board chair, as noted in Korn Ferry’s Board Chair of the Future study—having the experience of being in the top job can be invaluable as a director. The WSJ ranking, for example, gave a substantial boost to directors who've been CEOs. "If you've dealt with the same issues a CEO is dealing with you can provide much better advice,” Dolitch says.

But directors who've held CEO roles sometimes can struggle with shifting from being the top operator to serving in an advisor role. Experts say board members who can prioritize continuous feedback, practice active listening, and have a curiosity for self-learning are more likely to make a smoother transition from CEO to board member.

Board & CEO Services

Better leaders for a better world

Learn more

Market Indicators and Risk

Beyond individual traits, experts say one of the best ways to judge board effectiveness is by evaluating a firm’s stock performance and how the company handles risk. Directors are judged on whether their company has underperformed or overperformed stock indices. After all, their primary responsibility is to act in the best interest of shareholders—and maximize their value.

Of course, directors aren’t responsible for market fluctuations out of their control, such as tariffs and economic uncertainty. But recovering from those fluctuations and business disruptions is definitely in their remit. "In times of disruption directors have to hear each other out and come to a consensus about how to move forward,” Dotlich says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s CEO and Board practices.

Our Expert

Our Experts

David Dotlich, Ph.D.
President and Senior Partner

Scott Atkinson
Senior Client Partner, Global CEO & Board, Technology & Sustainability

Featured Insights

‘Let’s Take a Time-Out’: When Politics Hits the Boardroom
A Spree of Unplanned Successions
A Doozy for Disclosures
The (Tricky) Shift from CEO to Board Member

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Assessment & Succession

Succession Planning

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Assessment & Succession

Succession Planning

Life Sciences

Consumer Products

Financial Services

Healthcare

Technology

Manufacturing

Public Sector

Software & Platforms

Board & CEO Services

Kornferry2 LD

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by