‘Job Hugging,’ for Dear Life

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 12, 2025

‘Job Hugging,’ for Dear Life

After a spell of job hopping, employees are clinging to their jobs. How that may pose risks to firms and people’s careers.

Think about it: Have you noticed any colleagues leaving for a new role lately, or been asked to help someone find one elsewhere?

At an alarming rate, more and more employees are displaying what is colloquially known as “job hugging”—which is to say, holding onto their jobs for dear life. Most employees plan to stay in their jobs for the next six months, according to the Eagle Hill Retention Index, and perceive the job market as treacherous: Their sense of outside opportunities available to them has plummeted to its lowest level since the index began in 2023. And employees staying put is not necessarily good news. “Firms run the risk of becoming comfortable perches from which workers can jump when the time’s right,” says tech expert Matt Bohn, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, the job market has consistently cycled through stagnation jags for decades. But this time around, a sense of global events as unpredictable and unprecedented, combined with looming AI disruption, is making workers increasingly unsure—which can lead them to stay in holding patterns, rather than developing their skills and careers, says Bohn. Their torpor, in turn, blocks up-and-coming employees. “That’s the danger of this job market,” he says.

US job-growth figures slowed down substantially over the last quarter, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, to an anemic 73,000 jobs added in July, down from the 111,000 monthly average of earlier this year. Recruiters are seeing these dynamics play out among executives, as high-level employees stay put unless they’re overwhelmed by the compensation benefits of an external option. This makes recruiting challenging. “Right now, top performers are only leaving if they’re miserable in their roles,” says sales and marketing expert Stacy DeCesaro, managing consultant at Korn Ferry.

Experts say that employees putting down roots is not all doom and gloom, and can in fact bring companies some opportunities, beginning with a financial boon: Without pressure to match outside salaries, organizations face less of a need to raise wages. At the same time, with less turnover, recruitment and training costs dwindle, says compensation expert Tom McMullen, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. Simply put, holding on to your workers is good business.

For once, great teammates are not leaving for external jobs every couple years, which means firms can develop those talents and create more internal career paths. The key to capitalizing on the stagnant job market is to implement strong programs for internal development and performance management, says Dennis Deans, global human resources business partner at Korn Ferry. “It’s great to have a long-tenured workforce and build capacities within it.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Matt Bohn
Senior Client Partner, Technology Practice

Stacy DeCesaro
Managing Consultant, Sales & Marketing COE

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by