AI Job Applications Spur… In-Person Interviews?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 22, 2025

AI Job Applications Spur… In-Person Interviews?

Half of UK grads now use AI to apply for new roles, forcing some companies to hold more in-person interviews to get authentic information.

The candidate’s application looked great, and the firm was ready to hire her. Then came a question from one HR rep: Did the candidate actually write the résumé and cover letter, or had AI written them for her?

A new study shows that half of UK-based graduates seeking jobs are using AI to write their applications, up from 38% in 2024. And many HR pros believe the number is even higher, creating a thorny issue as firms try to figure out whether it was the candidate who wrote the great cover letter and list of suggestions—or AI. “Individuals are very cautious about revealing they are using AI, because some employers don’t respond well,” says Bryan Ackermann, Korn Ferry’s head of AI strategy and transformation.

The advantages of applying with AI are well-known. It can increase the number of job applications a person can pump out. More importantly, it may be able to defeat the automated hiring filters companies use—and that applicants need to get through. “The candidate can use AI to get data and shape their application,” says Tim Manasseh, Korn Ferry’s senior partner, EMEA, for global consumer products.

The result has had a profound impact at HR departments. “Now people are warier of AI-created résumés than ever before,” says Manasseh. Hiring staff have adopted a decidedly retro approach, requesting in-person interviews so they can discover who really has the required skills for the job. In simplest terms, they struggle to differentiate between candidates because almost anyone with a laptop can get AI to write a compelling letter, piece, or résumé. “That’s particularly true in the context of application materials,” says Matthew Atkinson, leader of Korn Ferry’s Assessment and Succession practice in UK & Ireland.

Some companies are proctoring interviews and tests conducted on Zoom to get a clearer assessment of the applicant. These tools confirm it really is a human being taking an assessment, that there is nobody else in the room, and that they aren’t looking at another screen, says Benjamin Frost, a Korn Ferry senior client partner, EMEA. “This is a big area of focus.”

Some organizations have taken a different tack by testing the candidate’s ability to work with and without AI tools. “During recruitment the candidates are sure to get tested on the AI part and the non-AI bit,” Ackermann says.

In the long run, recruiters worry that the use of AI could reduce or degrade an individual’s skills. And that seems to be an ongoing debate. However, some experts believe it comes down to how AI is used. If it’s just a crutch, it discourages independent thinking. But using AI as a tool can increase human capabilities.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Recruitment capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Bryan Ackermann
Senior Vice President, Head of AI Strategy & Transformation

Matthew Atkinson
Senior Client Partner

Benjamin Frost
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition