Reading Lists Are Back in Corporate America

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 17, 2025

Reading Lists Are Back in Corporate America

Leaders have a new strategy for training, and it’s old-school.

We’ve all been there: realizing that today is the last day to do the mandatory corporate training. We’re clicking through it, paying just enough attention to complete the upcoming quiz, and hurriedly checking it off our to-do list. Who among us hasn’t stretched, cleaned our desk, or stared out the window while the training drones on?

Corporate training efforts continue to struggle, with hurting organizations and leaders. Only one in five employees consider their company “very” or “extremely” effective at learning and development, according to 2024 research from the Society for Human Resources Management. But experts say that there may be a better approach, and it’s fittingly retro: mandatory book lists. “I think it’s a great idea,” says Marnix Boorsma, senior client partner in the CFO and Global Energy practices at Korn Ferry.

Both the military and certain consulting firms have long used reading lists to shape thinking. Military required reading lists are widelypublished. The titles, on topics like leadership, past wars, global dynamics, and history, are chosen to enrich service members at each level of leadership, though not for specific roles. “They’re curated around what information and skills are needed to be successful at each rank,” says JP Sniffen, practice leader in the Military Center of Expertise at Korn Ferry.

Corporate executives’ longstanding penchant for history books is well known, and those titles are frequently passed around C-suites; historical novels allow busy executives to absorb useful information couched in a narrative. But mandatory corporate reading has been rare since formalized reading lists fell by the wayside during the dot-com boom, as tweets, Instagram feeds, and text messages have cluttered employees’ lives. Executives used to read on airplanes, but now Wi-Fi enables them to work instead.

Experts say smart firms are formalizing shared reading lists for executives in order to enhance trainings and culture, both areas in which many firms are struggling. Books can accelerate development on topics like communication skills and leadership. At the same time, shared reading can also boost corporate culture at a time when many say it’s the weakest it has ever been. (This, despite the fact that leaders of the World’s Most Admired Companies say that culture is the number-one most underrated success factor.)

How, you ask, will solitary reading improve culture? Experts note that hybrid and remote employees are often already sitting alone. “It’s creating a shared experience that gives employees points of connection,” says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. The shared knowledge base also creates common intellectual and behavioral territory—all short paths to a stronger culture.

Of course, there are potential downsides. Firms have no way to confirm whether or not the books are actually read (though it may be obvious in some cases). And among hundreds or thousands of readers, at least a few are sure to take offense at some aspect of the material. Experts advise getting ahead of those dynamics by having a small team screen potential titles and compile a handful of top choices. “Don’t have a CEO just pull something off the shelf,” says Royal. The team’s introduction of their selections can be used as a chance to explain the values and limitations of the books: that they contain valuable ideas, and even less helpful parts can spark important conversations.

Experts advise leaning into the group activity aspect of reading lists. “It’s a powerful lever to create shared mental models, a common language, and quiet peer pressure to raise the bar,” says Boorsma.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Marnix Boorsma
Senior Client Partner

JP Sniffen
Practice Leader, Military COE & Physical Security

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Talent Acquisition

Leadership & Professional Assessments

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by