Career Advice Our Consultants Give Their Kids

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 8, 2025

Career Advice Our Consultants Give Their Kids

Having a parent who’s an expert in the job market pays off in spades.

Day in and day out at Korn Ferry, our consultants fill C-suite roles at firms around the world. Their expertise doesn’t dissipate into thin air at the end of the day; many go home and share their perspectives with the young people in their lives—admittedly, to varying degrees of enthusiasm.

This year, kids are listening more than usual, because it’s a tricky time to be a young person on the job market: The teen unemployment rate has crept up to 13%, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and recent college graduates are having a hard time getting a foot in the door. Despite making up only 5% of the workforce, they account for 12% of the increase in the national unemployment rate since 2023, according to Oxford Economics.

With AI’s reshaping of the workplace, even safe-bet careers that were essential just five years ago are now disappearing. So we asked our consultants what advice they give their children.

Learn to problem-solve early.

“I tell them that the world is changing so quickly, both in technology and geopolitics, that I’m most interested in them learning how to think for themselves and how to be insatiably curious. No matter what path or profession they go into, thinking about how to solve problems and create value will be critically important.”

—Seth Steinberg, senior client partner in Korn Ferry's Supply Chain Center of Expertise

Get good at something.

“I tell them to ignore the ‘follow your passion’ cliché. It’s backwards. Passion rarely precedes competence; it usually follows it. Get good at something first—ideally something hard, useful, and in demand. That’s what creates confidence, opens doors, and often becomes a passion. I also suggest trying something entrepreneurial early. Not because everyone should be a founder, but because building something forces you to engage with the real world—value, rejection, cash flow, self-discipline. That experience rewires your understanding of work in a way no job ever could.” —Marnix Boorsma, senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Amsterdam office

Be curious.

“I tell my kids that the one skill set that seems to have the most long-term value is curiosity, coupled with being interested in what other people think.”

—David Vied, Korn Ferry's global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics

Try the craft route.

“We’ve got two kids, and one is on a blue-collar track, and we are absolutely encouraging him to pursue it, because it’s a great life. Craftsperson business owners, landscapers, and bricklayers are all great businesspeople, and provide services that we need. Trade school had gone out of favor with all the technology jobs, but it’s coming back. We desperately need these folks.”

—Louis Montgomery Jr., principal in Korn Ferry's HR Center of Expertise

Stress less, strategize more.

“I’ve got adult kids, and I tell them not to stress about what the job market’s going to do. Instead, figure out how to use it to your advantage. For example, those who understand how to really use AI may be propelled into bigger jobs quicker.”

—Matt Bohn, senior client partner in Korn Ferry's Technology practice

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

Marnix Boorsma
Senior Client Partner

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Louis Montgomery Jr.
Principal, HR Center of Expertise

Matt Bohn
Senior Client Partner, Technology Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career