The Past is the Present

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

The Past is the Present

A Briefings list of thought-provoking and riveting historical-nonfiction reads.

Latest Issue:

​

Download a PDF

​

Browse the Flip Version

July 31, 2025

Some make the argument that history is fractal, with particular moments representative of enduring trends and truths that extend through the annals. The who, what, when, and where may change, but the why repeats. If that’s so, it makes sense that historical nonfiction is thriving during a time when many are attempting to make sense of the here and now.

As a literary genre, historical nonfiction holds within it a multitude of subgenres, from romance to true crime to biography. While these works are based on rigorous reporting that attempts to remain true to real events and people, the stories are told by authors living in the current era and, therefore, through the lens of hindsight. Instead of sensationalizing, these reads explore broader contexts that can sometimes only come into view when given space.

There continues to be strong reader demand for works that highlight untold stories and reexamine existing narratives. The global book market, valued at $150 billion in 2024, is estimated to reach more than $192 billion by 2030, driven by educational texts. As you’ll find, learning doesn’t have to be dull. Here’s a Briefings list of thought-provoking and riveting historical-nonfiction reads.

The New York Game

by Kevin Baker

Baseball may be America’s pastime, but the sport was born in New York, and came to represent the city’s struggles and possibilities.

The Wide Wide Sea

by Hampton Sides

In 1776, Captain James Cook was killed by natives after sailing ashore on the island now known as Hawaii. What happened? An exploration of the Age of Exploration.

King of Kings

by Scott Anderson

The author of Lawrence in Arabia presents a narrative of the events leading to the Iranian Revolution and an era of religious nationalism.

Murderland

by Caroline Fraser

A true-crime thriller about the proliferation of serial killers in the Pacific Northwest who emerged amid environmental destruction and despair.

The Swans of Harlem

by Karen Valby

A love story of five professional Black ballerinas who embodied grace, grit, and the power of female friendship during the height of the Civil Rights movement.

Related Articles

View All Briefings Issue 70 Articles
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Article

July 31, 2025
Insight Articles

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by