‘Let’s Take a Time-Out’: When Politics Hits the Boardroom

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|June 16, 2025

‘Let’s Take a Time-Out’: When Politics Hits the Boardroom

As polarization grows, directors may face tough conversations among each other or with corporate leaders.

Key takeaways

Why directors may face more political discussions in the boardroom
Three ways board members can handle uncomfortable political banter
How multiple perspectives can help board members amplify their impact

Three Ways to Handle Uncomfortable Politics in the Boardroom

At a recent board meeting, the conversation wasn’t just about growth projections or regulatory risks. It turned toward a topic directors once carefully avoided: politics.

From wars across the globe to headline-grabbing tariffs, today’s most pressing issues are both politically charged and business critical. For board directors, staying neutral isn’t always an option. What one director sees as a moral imperative, another may see as a detour from the company’s mission. “When things get intense, someone has to bring the conversation back to the core tenets of the organization and its purpose,” says Elise Schroeter, global head of organization and talent strategies for the Board and CEO practice at Korn Ferry.

It’s a balancing act playing out in real time: One director urges bold public statements around a company’s stance on DEI or climate change. Another questions the risk of alienating customers, or legislators. Still others remain quiet, fearing missteps in a room where worldviews may vary more than ever before. And with proxy season bringing more politically tinged proposals to the forefront, major investors are looking to boards to show not just awareness, but thoughtful critical oversight.

In such a heightened environment, it’s crucial for directors to remember why they’re in the room. “When there are differences among colleagues, the narrative to come back to is, ‘Why are we here in the first place?’” Schroeter says. “Boards aren’t running the company, but have the fiduciary responsibility to move the organization forward, regardless of the changing face of the environment.”

Focusing on their purpose can help board members push beyond surface differences and separate what’s material from what’s trending. “You need to inoculate yourself against the reaction to the word ‘Trump’ because it obscures really important things to talk about,” says David Vied, global sector leader for the Medical Devices and Diagnostics practice at Korn Ferry. “Engage around the intellectual substance, and look at the question behind the question.”

It’s also incumbent on all directors—not just the board chair or CEO—to rein each other in when things get feisty, and to establish protocols on how to disagree in a constructive way. This may mean appointing one member to keep a temperature check on the room, or calling for a five-minute break to reset when things get heated.

Board & CEO Services

Better leaders for a better world

Learn more

And if all else fails, remember that multiple perspectives—not debating them, but rather using them to understand business impact more fully—is never a bad thing. “Perspective can amplify impact,” Schroeter says. “It’s less about self, and more about us and we.”

Find out more about how boards and leaders are handling today’s volatility by exploring our leadership topics hub.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Elise Schroeter
Global Head, Organization & Talent Strategies, Board & CEO Practice, Managing Partner, CEO/C-Suite Impact Accelerator

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Featured Insights

CEOs—They’re Just Like Us!
A Spree of Unplanned Successions
In Europe, the Push to Go Private
Pulling Up the Chair

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Life Sciences

Consumer Products

Financial Services

Healthcare

Retail

Software & Platforms

Technology

Board & CEO Services

Kornferry2 LD

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by