Always Getting Hired

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 17, 2025

Always Getting Hired

Today’s top jobs are going to the same small group of candidates. What do they have that the others don't?

Michael had been looking for a job forever. Well, it felt like forever: ten months of applications and occasional interviews. Meanwhile, his friend received an offer three days after quitting an executive role. Michael had seen this movie before. Among peers with the same skill sets, a few managed to get hired over and over again, while the rest looked on.

The job market continues to be brutal, particularly for many seasoned white-collar applicants and new graduates. Yet experts say that the same few candidates seem to get hired again and again—a tiny group that radiates assuredness in a moment of unpredictability, experts say. “Volatility and uncertainty are unprecedented right now,” says Maneesh Dube, senior client partner in the Executive Search practice at Korn Ferry. “Topic expertise and experiences are not sufficient anymore.”

This is bad news for the many candidates with topic expertise and relevant experience. Indeed, experts say that for the majority of those in the applicant pool, one particular trait is disqualifying: a recent job demonstrating success at tasks nearly, but not precisely, identical to those of the new job. “Today, the only sure-thing hire is someone who has already done exactly what you need done,” says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics at Korn Ferry.

Two other traits are also highly sought-after. “There's a lot more emphasis on entrepreneurialism and the ability to adapt and pivot,” says Moses Zonana, senior client partner in the Technology practice at Korn Ferry. Less popular: linear career arcs, or someone who stayed at the same firm for fifteen years. This year, firms are seeking candidates who’ve had exposure to many different environments, which allows them to quickly pivot and connect dots, says Zonana. These criteria disqualify the many candidates who rose up the ranks at one firm, or who have overtly entrepreneurial résumés. Job seekers like Michael can easily find themselves frustrated on the sidelines.

Experts say firms sticking to this strategy risk losing out on some innovative talent. But this so-called “sure-thing” hiring strategy is very familiar to sports fans. Front offices commonly buy players whose statistics match the team’s needs. The upside is obvious: Someone who has done the exact same job elsewhere can hit the ground running. Yet pro teams share the same problem of prizing a select few players, while hundreds of others look on. In the corporate world, a sharply limited hiring pool causes headaches. Add in noncompetes and availability, and hiring delays ensue—at a time when hiring times are on the rise. Sixty percent of firms saw hiring times increase in 2024, up from 44% in 2023, according to a report by AI firm GoodTime, with just 6% seeing decreases in 2024.

Experts say that the tiny-hiring-pool phenomenon is common across industries, though sought-after characteristics can vary. For example, in tech, the ability to learn and adapt quickly is prioritized. “With the speed of tech development, it’s the only way to do it,” says Zonana. Meanwhile, the energy industry was long known for its incestuous in-sector hiring. That has shifted in the last five years, as hiring managers realize that similar experience trumps sector specificity. For example, a company seeking transformation might find a candidate who has already led a successful transformation in a sister industry, says Lucy Bosworth, senior client partner at Korn Ferry: “There’s more of a sense of the need to have real domain expertise, versus just being in the sector.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Maneesh Dube
Senior Client Partner

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Moses Zonana
Senior Client Partner, Technology

Lucy Bosworth
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Talent Acquisition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by