5 Ways to Be Sure Your Boss Sees Your Good Work

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 9, 2025

5 Ways to Be Sure Your Boss Sees Your Good Work

There’s an art to subtly letting it be known that you’re the best employee ever. And it may be needed in this job market.

Everyone wants to be sure their boss knows how hard they’re working. It's particularly important now, as companies are hiring fewer people and looking to use AI tools to do tasks that people have been doing. But communicating your commitment to a busy manager is often easier said than done, particularly if you’re part of a hybrid team. Simply put, your boss is not standing by and waiting to see the latest indicators that you’re doing a good job. “Bosses tend to default to either ‘no news is good news’ or ‘as long as key milestones are being hit, all is going well,’” says business psychologist James Bywater, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. This makes grabbing their attention on the right projects a critical skill.

Experts say that making your boss aware of your efforts is not just good preparation for the next performance review…though it will help you there, too: Studies have long shown that employees perceived to be putting in their best efforts enjoy higher performance ratings. Keeping your boss apprised of your projects and time commitments facilitates a trusting relationship, and encourages feedback. But experts advise proceeding with some subtlety: Constantly broadcasting effort levels is not the way to go. Here’s how to let your boss know that you’re working hard without actually saying so:

Get your boss’s attention with positivity.

The last thing your boss needs is another challenging conversation. The trick, says Bywater, is to let them know what you want to talk about—for instance, that you’d like their thoughts on your slides. “No surprises,” Bywater recommends: Make your presentation in such a way that your boss will feel empowered, not overburdened.

Ask for feedback.

Nothing telegraphs “I’m working hard on this” like presenting a rough draft and asking for pointers. “It allows you to subtly highlight what you’ve been working on, without looking too boastful,” says supply chain expert Seth Steinberg, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. If it’s a team project, make sure to emphasize the team over yourself: Having the gumption to ask for feedback is plenty of messaging in and of itself.

Glue yourself to important work.

Use your limited face time with your boss to discuss high-level work, so that they think of you when they think of this kind of project. “You want it top of mind that you’re the one associated with this important initiative,” says organizational strategist Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

Confirm that you’re using time well.

Demonstrating hard work is not just about image. “You’re making sure that you’re not wasting your time!” says Amato. For example, if you’re five hours into work that your boss deems low priority, she might shift you to another task, or connect you with a more efficient way of getting it done.

Respond during off-hours.

Though most HR departments will tell you that off-hours replies are unnecessary, the truth is murkier, especially with bosses or clients in other time zones. Experts advise going about your personal life, but checking for off-hours messages when it suits you—and hitting reply. “An email answered after hours is a time stamp of your commitment to your job,” says Steinberg, and communicates that you’re not thinking about your responsibilities only between 9 AM and 5 PM.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

James Bywater
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career