Putting Leadership on the Map

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|June 9, 2025

Putting Leadership on the Map

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison explains how leadership is constantly evolving.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

I hadn’t seen them in years, maybe even a couple of decades. But when I recently opened the glovebox of an old car I’ve kept for sentimental reasons, there was that dusty pouch. And inside—all those roadmaps.

Spreading each one across the hood of the car, I studied the highlighted routes, destinations circled in pencil, notes in the margins. All the stories came back to me—the road trips we took, the places we stopped, even meetings I attended.

One side of the map gave the bird’s eye view from city to city—along highways with numbers as familiar now as they were then—405, 5, 101. On the other side the focus narrowed to the granularity of neighborhoods and city streets.

Frankly, it boggled my mind to think about how we used to travel from neighborhood to neighborhood, state to state, and even across the country with nothing more than paper to guide us. And it wasn’t that long ago.

We’ve gone from pencils on paper to pressing a 7-inch screen with the world of where we’re going mapped out for us. Coincidentally, all that transition has happened within a window that mirrors my own leadership journey.

And that got me thinking. How much has leadership changed… or has it?

Clearly, there are fundamentals of leadership. A few of these essential truths come to mind:

Leadership is inspiring others to believe and enabling that belief to become reality. First and foremost, that is our primary role as leaders.

It’s not about you, but it starts with you.Humility and self-awareness go hand in hand. If you don’t improve yourself, you’ll never improve an organization.

Coaches don’t win games, players do.It’s all about the mosaic of talent you surround yourself with.

Establish the left and right guardrails. Leaders define the mission and values of the organization—then others take it from there.

Listen to what you don’t want to hear. The difference between hearing and listening is comprehending.

Learn—always.Knowledge is what we know; wisdom is acknowledging what we don’t know. Learning is the bridge between the two.

Communicate to constantly connect with others.This is where leadership lives and breathes.

Then as now, the essence of good leadership is timeless.

It’s just like those old maps. Sure, there are a few different street names or errant exits, but no doubt today I could still use them to get from Point A to Point B.

But that isn’t evolving.

Over the past few years, I’ve witnessed no greater evolution in leadership, from the ways of the past to the new world of working, than the premium placed on authenticity and vulnerability.

Early in my CEO career, I would have described a great leader as someone with vision, a growth mindset, confidence, charisma, courage. Then a board member called me aside. “Burnison, you need to be more vulnerable. You’ll be amazed by the results.”

To navigate so much uncertainty and ambiguity, leaders need to be confident; but too much self-confidence can narrow our peripheral vision. As counterintuitive as it may seem, vulnerability is actually a strength for leaders, particularly when we know that all of tomorrow’s answers won’t be found at the top. Rather, they emerge from the mosaic of people, talents, and perspectives around us. And the more we as leaders are willing to be vulnerable, the more we empower others.

But here’s the thing. A leader can’t wake up one day and declare, “I’m going to be a great leader today,” then go to bed that night saying, “And tomorrow, vulnerable!”

The landscape is always changing, but our direction is always driven by our “why”—our overarching purpose. It’s a journey—one we have to navigate day to day, week to week, one destination to the next.

It’s a fact of life and leadership—the roadmap that got us here, won’t get us there.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by