5 Cringeworthy Ways Job Candidates Appear Outdated

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 15, 2025

5 Cringeworthy Ways Job Candidates Appear Outdated

Even the most qualified candidates can blow a job interview with an obsolete reference or old-school webcam. Here’s what not to do.

The candidate had everything going for her, until she decided to mention her fondness for… printouts.

In today’s ever-tougher job market, mistakes can be costly—especially the ones that show that you’re out of touch. Recruiters share tales of woe about strong candidates who ruined their shot at the big job by announcing their fondness for landlines, or admitting to “not doing social media.” With one wrong phrase, a job seeker can appear out of touch with modern workplace norms—and land in the rejection pile.

To be sure, candidates of any age can fall into this trap. But an outdated look is particularly risky for boomers seeking jobs. Three-quarters of workers over age 50 already expect their age to be a barrier in getting hired, according to a 2025 survey by AARP, so not fueling the ageism fire is essential. We asked Korn Ferry experts for what they coach candidates to stop doing immediately.

Dropping names.

In days of yesteryear, knowing people who knew board members smoothed the path to a seat on the board. No longer, says Kim Van Der Zon, global vice chair and leader of the Board Succession and CEO practice at Korn Ferry. Today’s boards seek not just a longstanding relationship, but precise expertise and relevant business experiences. “The old ‘we belong to the same golf club’ days are over,” says Van Der Zon.

Using an old email domain.

We know you love your legacy email address. But don’t use it on that résumé. “Modern email platforms connote a more recent technology environment,” says supply-chain expert Seth Steinberg, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

Showing ignorance of company details.

Before the internet, some private companies maintained such low profiles that researching them from the outside was nearly impossible. That’s no longer the case. “Having no real knowledge of the company is a deal-breaker,” says retail expert Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. He suggests reading investor materials and, for publicly traded companies, Form 10-Ks.

Having antiquated home technology.

Most interviews via videoconference happen on work-from-home days. “Someone who knows about technology will have a strong home office technology setup,” says Steinberg, who has cringed at the low-quality video and audio of candidates’ ancient webcams. This issue is particularly pivotal for applicants seeking top leadership or tech-heavy roles.

Having an ancient-sounding LinkedIn profile.

Nothing screams “I’m from 1992!” like a decades-old LinkedIn photo above an out-of-date profile. “Little or no LinkedIn presence is almost suspicious,” says Steinberg. He notes that a full résumé with confidential details is not necessary. “If you aren’t comfortable with a photo for privacy reasons, at least have the content up-to-date.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kim Van Der Zon
Vice Chair, Global Board & CEO Services

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by