Something to Talk About

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Something to Talk About

What to watch on the big screen this summer.

Latest Issue:

​

Download a PDF

​

Browse the Flip Version

May 28, 2026

Hollywood is betting this year on luring back moviegoers with franchise sequels, ambitious epics, and cultural manifestos. With the traditional blockbuster formulas no longer selling tickets, studios and A-list actors are experimenting with a new method: Make movies that get people talking.

Ticket sales in North America totaled $8.9 billion last year, up 2 percent from 2024 even while attendance declined 5 percent. Higher ticket prices drove the increase in revenue as sales have struggled to recover to pre-pandemic levels. While anticipated blockbusters fell flat, original titles that captured the cultural zeitgeist, like Sinners and F1: The Movie, did surprisingly well. In addition to being entertained, viewers want to feel a part of something bigger. Briefings has compiled a list of what to watch this summer so you can join the conversation.

The End of Oak Street

Director: David Robert Mitchell

Cast: Anne Hathaway, Ewan McGregor

A cryptic sci-fi about a family in the 1980s that starts to notice bizarre happenings in their neighborhood.

The Odyssey

Director: Christopher Nolan

Cast: Matt Damon, Tom Holland, Anne Hathaway

Based on Homer's Greek epic, the film follows Odysseus journeying home after the Trojan War.

I Love Boosters

Director: Boots Riley

Cast: Keke Palmer, LaKeith Stanfield, Naomi Ackie, Demi Moore

A comedy following a crew of shoplifters attempting to take down a fashion icon.

The Adventures of Cliff Booth

Director: David Fincher

Cast: Brad Pitt, Elizabeth Debicki, Yahya Abdul- Mateen II

The sequel to Once Upon a Time…in Hollywood is supposedly Quentin Tarantino’s final screenplay.

Disclosure Day

Director: Steven Spielberg

Cast: Emily Blunt, Josh O’Connor, Colin Firth

A sci-fi that asks: “If you found out we weren't alone … would that frighten you?”

Photo Credits: Universal Pictures;Warner Bros; Netflix; Neon

Related Articles

View All Briefings Issue 74 Articles
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Article

Briefings Magazine

May 28, 2026
Insight Articles