The Great Tradedown

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 15, 2025

The Great Tradedown

Sixty-one percent of consumers say that they are already trading down from name brands, and firms are hurrying to stanch the bleeding.

When a brand executive has nightmares, they typically feature consumers walking right past their carefully designed product displays, only to pause at the generic option and enthusiastically begin filling their carts. Oh, the horror!

Turns out, this bad dream is coming true. Sixty-one percent of consumers say they are already trading down to cheaper products, according to a new survey by marketing research firm Savanta, and 77% say that they expect their finances to be further disrupted by tariffs. Brands find these statistics horrifying. “Once shoppers trade down, as long as they find the experience acceptable, they’re going to stay with it,” says retail expert Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. Long-term customers—gone in an instant.

To be sure, some customers might return to their favorite shoes or pasta brands… in 2027. In the meantime, trading down is happening on a large scale across consumer goods. And it may grow, with this week’s US inflation numbers edging up. Consumer changes of routine are particularly troubling to branding experts, because shopping itself is fundamentally a practice of habit: Consumers tend to frequent the same stores and online shops, and within them, usually buy the same items over and over.

But experts say that brands have a bigger problem than shrinking customer budgets on their hands. Customers are increasingly skeptical about pricing, especially after watching some companies raise prices before tariffs have impacted them. “There’s a lot of cynicism around marquee brands,” says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics at Korn Ferry.

Similar consumption dynamics are playing out in B2B, where longtime customers are renegotiating pricing this quarter and asking for segmentation of contracts. “We’re seeing it all over,” says Ron Seifert, North America workforce reward and benefits leader at Korn Ferry. “Whether it’s IP or experience or speed or depth of insights, firms have to differentiate.”

In consumer, the real victor is retailers with private labels, which surged in the wake of the Great Recession, the last time consumers traded down in large numbers. Private labels are popular among retailers because they provide a lower price choice within the same store, and because they provide exclusivity, which attracts consumers. And, of course, they are more lucrative per unit for the retailer. “They’re a real win for retailers,” says Rowley.

Brands, of course, are many months into working through their options. “Right now it’s all about choices,” says Renee Whalen, North America consumer market leader at Korn Ferry. Customers have hard choices, and brands have harder choices. Among brands’ options: offering versions that cost less to both manufacturer and customer, such as smaller packages or a line of lower-quality shirts. And if all else fails, brands are increasingly jumping into the private-label game, often by relabeling their product as a popular store’s house brand. “Many companies are leaning into that bet,” says Whalen.

Another option is to offer promotions, which brands agree on with retailers and typically fund. “Their challenge is to sharpen their pencil and figure out how to deliver products at a lower price point and still defend their margins,” says Rowley. The key, say experts, is for brands to refresh shoppers’ memories, reintroducing themselves in order to justify their pricing. “Brands need to remind consumers that they like each other, and why,” says Vied.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

Renee Whalen
Senior Client Partner, Market Leader

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Talent Acquisition

Automotive

Consumer Products

Retail

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by