All Charged Up, and Nowhere to Go

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 11, 2025

All Charged Up, and Nowhere to Go

The number of charging stations for electric vehicles in the US is growing at a record pace this year. The problem: Electric-vehicle sales have stalled.

At a small apartment community in suburban New Jersey, four new charging stations for electric vehicles are being installed. On a long stretch of highway in California, a rest stop is being redesigned to include an equal number of charging stations and gas pumps for travelers and truckers. In a mall in Texas, a row of charging stations occupies a prime position next to the main entrance.

For the better part of a decade, conventional wisdom held that a scarcity of charging stations was holding back electric-vehicle sales. If more stations were built, the thinking went, consumers wouldn’t worry about being stranded. Electric-vehicle sales would take off. But new data is challenging that assumption. Construction of new public charging stations is proceeding at a record pace this year, with about 16,700 expected to be added, a 20% increase over 2024. The number of charging stations in the US has more than doubled since 2022.

But something has been left behind: EV sales. In the second quarter, sales decreased 6.3% in the US. Last year, following 20% growth (or more) in the early part of the decade, electric-vehicle sales grew just 10%; through the first half of 2025, they’re only up 1.5% overall. The numbers contrast sharply with sales globally, but the domestic challenges for the industry are uniquely American: In the US, expiring tax incentives, soaring energy costs, and a change in cultural attitudes have all conspired to produce one of the worst quarters for EVs on record. That, in turn, may put the brakes on the charging-station boom. “Anyone making an investment in electric-vehicle infrastructure in North America right now is doing so with a lot of uncertainty about the time frame for payback,” says Brad Marion, global leader for the automotive sector at Korn Ferry.

The stalling of EV sales is a startling reminder that growing infrastructure for a product doesn’t necessarily guarantee a growing customer base, says Meredith Moot, a senior client partner in the logistics, distribution, and transportation practice at Korn Ferry. It’s a lesson that leaders in many other industries have to bear in mind, she says, as current global tariff issues threaten to rejigger some industries. “Don’t build a warehouse for a client you HOPE will grow,” Moot says by way of an analogy. “If you are investing in infrastructure, you need to cosign that investment with the individuals responsible for the growth.”

For now, though, the decline in sales is changing the calculus on charging-station investments, particularly among independent developers, says Richard Preng, a senior client partner in the at Korn Ferry. “Firms may not be as aggressive with infrastructure build-out going forward,” says Preng, noting that the growth in charging stations is owed to capital investments made years ago. To be sure, he notes that AI and the data centers needed to power it energy costs soaring by a factor of ten or more—from $27 per kilowatt hour to $320 in some markets—while oil and gas prices are coming down. “EVs are still expensive, and if incentives go away and electricity costs continue to rise, it’s tough to see sales rebounding dramatically in the near future,” he says.

Balancing growth in charging-station build-out with slowing electric-vehicle sales will be a challenge for US leaders. Globally, electric-vehicle sales grew 28% in the first half of 2025, with China—with 5.5 million of 9.1 million sold—leading the way. In Europe, EV sales in Europe grew by 26%, to 2 million. Most experts agree that electric-vehicle sales, along with infrastructure build-out needed to support them, will continue to grow. But the pace is likely to slow significantly, they caution, at least in the US. “There will be a pause in progress in North America,” says Marion.

Moot agrees, adding that in the meantime leaders must determine how long that pause will last and where to place long-term bets. “It’s going to be a real test of the ‘If you build it, they will come’ strategy,” she says. at Korn Ferry. “It’s going to be a real test of the ‘If you build it, they will come’ strategy,” she says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Bradford Marion
Global Sector Leader, Automotive

Meredith Moot
Senior Client Partner – Logistics, Distribution & Transportation Sectors

Richard Preng
Senior Client Partner, Energy, Board & CEO Services

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Logistics & Transportation Services

Automotive

Energy & Natural Resources