The Iconic CEOs: Can They Be Replaced?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 7, 2025

The Iconic CEOs: Can They Be Replaced?

Warren’s Buffett’s departure raises a thorny issue: About half of leaders perform significantly worse than their successful predecessors.

History is filled with transcendent leaders of companies, governments, sports teams and organizations. Their tenures are marked by meaningful, positive, lasting success. Then they leave, and the next person steps in. And both the new leader—and many others—quickly wish they hadn’t.

The topic has been front and center since Warren Buffett, who has led Berkshire Hathaway for 60 years, announced that he’ll step down at the end of 2025. Though the transition has been planned for years, it still sent the company’s stock down 6% the day after it was announced. It’s being whispered about at other firms as well. Currently, ten CEOs of the nation’s 1,500 largest firms are over 80 years old. A few dozen large companies are led by CEOs with tenures of 20 years or more.

Any CEO departure is a shock to the system, one that’s only exacerbated when the CEO is replacing a founder or a longstanding iconic boss, says Alan Guarino, vice chairman of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. “You can’t expect the new CEO to come in, walk through the door, and expect business as usual,” he says.

Buffett is in a class by himself when it comes to success for investors—his performance would be nearly impossible for anyone to surpass. But successors often don’t come close to doing as well as the legends they replace. One study—of the period between 2004 and 2018—looked at shareholder returns of CEOs who had served in the role for at least 10 years compared to the leaders who succeeded them. Nearly half of the successors, or 49%, significantly underperformed their predecessors, while only 24% significantly outperformed. The successor CEOs often lasted for a far shorter time than the longstanding CEOs had—5.3 years versus 13.7 years, respectively—and the successors, when they left, were significantly more likely to have been forced out.

That’s partly because a company’s brand and an iconic CEO often become intertwined. “You try to build organizations around a system, not just one individual,” says Matt Bohn, a Korn Ferry senior client partner in the firm’s Technology practice. To get around that, some successors ignore the organization’s processes and impose their personal stamp on it, often with negative results. Having a strategic, planned succession—first to identify the new CEO, then to help them in their first year—can help reduce risks and accelerate positive results, Guarino says.

Still, before the new boss can figure out whether to significantly change the business strategy and culture created by the long-serving boss, they have to establish relations with the remaining executives, many of whom will wonder whether they have a future at the firm.

In fact, experts say that listening to executives and other employees is one of the best things a successor can do. Jonathan Wildman, senior client partner with Korn Ferry Advisory, suggests the new CEO follow a “listening plan” for their first three months. That not only can build relations and trust, but also can help identify what needs to change. “You’re basically creating a blueprint for what you want to continue,” Wildman says.

The iconic boss, assuming he or she left on good terms, should act as an advisor. “That can help alleviate concerns inside and outside the company,” says Reena Patel, principal in Korn Ferry’s Global Financial Officers and Healthcare Services practices.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Alan Guarino
Vice Chairman, CEO and Board Services

Matt Bohn
Senior Client Partner, Technology Practice

Jonathan Wildman
North America, Life Science Consulting Leader

Reena Patel
Senior Client Partner, Global Financial Officers’ & Healthcare Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Assessment & Succession

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by