When the Boardroom Becomes a War Room

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|April 28, 2025

When the Boardroom Becomes a War Room

Amid trade wars, pressure from activist investors, and economic uncertainty, boards are taking on a new role.

Key takeaways

Why 75% of directors say shifting economic conditions will dominate boardroom agendas for the next quarter
The reasons behind why boards are spending a significant amount of time on scenario planning and meeting more frequently
Why veterans of volatility may fare better in the current environment

Trade Wars and Other Uncertainties Force Directors into Special Meetings for Scenario Planning

The group of directors were meeting—but without the usual agenda. Off the table: discussions of long-term succession, the latest on compensation, and how to comply with new regulations. On the table: scenario planning for tariffs, workforce restructuring amid economic uncertainty, and navigating challenges from activist investors.

As the world has changed drastically in recent months, so has the way at least some boards are meeting. Experts say we’ve entered a new age of the board “war room,” or scenario planning. Indeed, the speed with which directors are having to make decisions has jumped sharply, forcing many to take part in an increased number of urgent calls and informal touchpoints with both their peers and executives. “Management and the board have to be tied at the hip,” says Radhika Papandreou, president of North America at Korn Ferry and a member of the CEO and Board Services practice. “Directors are leaning into the global perspective and spending a lot of time on scenario planning.”

According to a recent field survey by the National Association of Corporate Directors, an unsurprising 75% of respondents said the top issue on a board’s agenda is shifting economic conditions (typically only 43% to 58% cite this topic). Respondents also rated geopolitical volatility (46%) and political risk (41%) as hot-button issues for boards in the upcoming quarter. “It’s hard for directors to tell if the current economy is a blip or a new normal,” says Jane Edison Stevenson, global vice chair of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice.

Leadership & Professional Development

Help your people exceed their potential, so they can unlock yours

Learn more

To be sure, this isn’t an entirely new development for boards. A record increase in shareholder activism last year forced many to hold special meetings, chiefly to discuss how to communicate effectively with stakeholders, investors, and employees. Companies with seasoned CEOs and CFOs who have weathered previous downturns have a leg up in the current environment, experts say, particularly since an unprecedented number of incoming leaders last year were first-timers. Veterans of volatile market environments understand the importance of increasing the level of communication while running a war room.

Many directors also took part in urgent meetings during the COVID-19 pandemic. At the time, they increased their overall time commitment by nearly 20%, one survey found. But the challenge for directors remains the same: to maintain their role as advisors—not act as day-to-day leaders. Directors need to have “a cool head and not add to the drama,” says Anthony Goodman, leader of Korn Ferry’s North American Board Effectiveness practice. “They need to remember they’re not running the company, but providing challenge, support, and guidance.”

Find out more about how boards and leaders are handling today’s volatility by exploring our leadership topics hub.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Anthony Goodman
Senior Client Partner, Head of the Board Effectiveness Practice

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

Radhika Papandreou
President, North America

Featured Insights

How to Make the CEO Stay
Regulation Overload?
Fired from the Government, Heading to the Board?

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Board & CEO Services

Kornferry2 LD

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by