Beware the Black Swans

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 16, 2025

Beware the Black Swans

One after another, a series of seemingly rare, nerve-shattering events have tested leaders. Is a new skill set needed to lead through such upheaval?

Two decades ago, former Wall Street trader Nassim Nicholas Taleb wrote that investors, traders, and business leaders shouldn’t be fooled into thinking that just because they’d never experienced a seemingly impossible, massive disruptive change—a black swan event—that they never would.

However, in the 2020s, it seems that those rare, unpredictable, massively consequential black swan events are beginning to happen at least once a year. The on-again, off-again tariff policies that sent the US bond market into its most volatile period in decades—and company leaders scrambling to assess the threat to their businesses—are only the latest in a series of events, starting with the COVID-19 pandemic, that have forced leaders to steer their organizations not only through uncertainty, but also through jarring occurrences. And most are struggling. “Many are like deer staring at headlights,” says Maneesh Dube, a Korn Ferry senior client partner in the firm’s Executive Search business.

While the business world certainly has had its fair share of upheaval over the past few hundred years, most of it has happened gradually, over decades, such as the development of the internet. Most leaders who experienced the last business-centric black swan event, the 2008 financial crisis, are now gone. “The current generation of C-suite leaders had not seen black swan events or a recession or a tough business environment ever,” says Dube.

That is, until the COVID-19 lockdowns, followed by the biggest jump in inflation in 40 years, followed by a surge in employee empowerment not seen since the 1950s. If that weren’t enough, there was the biggest armed conflict in Europe in 80 years, the public introduction of large-language artificial-intelligence tools, and now, a global trade war.

Experts say leaders have to digest information and immediately take action, even as the constantly changing environment makes those choices far riskier. The experience can even alter a leader’s body chemistry and thinking, says s Miriam Nelson, a Korn Ferry senior client partner in the firm’s North America Assessment and Succession business. “Our cognitive functioning is legitimately compromised, and it can hurt our ability to focus on the long term,” she says. In many cases, leaders have decided the best strategy during black swan events is to halt expansions, spending, and hiring. This could very well be the right decision, experts say, but it shouldn’t be the default response.

Leaders may hope that black swan events will decrease in frequency, experts say, but they shouldn’t count on that happening. “That unpredictability has become our norm,” says Tamara Rodman, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Culture, Change and Communications practice. Instead, leaders need to lead through the uncertainty and upheaval. “Flexibility and adaptability are critical in leaders, now more than ever,” observes Kim Van Der Zon, global vice chair and leader of Korn Ferry’s Board Succession and CEO practice. Indeed, more boards are demanding leadership candidates who have demonstrated both resilience and the ability to unite a team behind a common vision, Van Der Zon says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Maneesh Dube
Senior Client Partner

Miriam Nelson, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, Assessment and Succession

Tamara Rodman
Senior Client Partner, Culture, Change & Communications

Kim Van Der Zon
Vice Chair, Global Board & CEO Services

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by