Humans Need Not Apply

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 25, 2025

Humans Need Not Apply

AI workplace tools that don’t need human supervision are on the rise, so much so that a new job site is dedicated to hiring only AI agents. Are we being replaced faster than we expected?

The postings look like any other job site’s. Titles like “Contract Lawyer” and “Demand Generation Research Analyst” appear in bold black letters with the company name below. Clicking through brings up a description of the role and responsibilities, requirements, company background, pay range, and application process.

The only difference? These postings are for companies looking to hire AI agents, not humans.

Despite a lot of talk that AI will partner with rather than replace people, the evidence suggests the opposite is taking place, and far faster than anticipated. In the latest example, so-called “AI agents”—capable of autonomously handling tasks like reviewing contracts, writing memos, or holding complex conversations—can now apply for roles on their own dedicated job site. Another tech startup created a stir recently with a viral marketing campaign telling companies to “stop hiring humans.” And then there’s the push from big-tech leaders themselves, who are incorporating AI agents into their products, as well as selling them to enterprises to supplement human workforces.

Bryan Ackermann, head of AI strategy and transformation at Korn Ferry, says these developments could give rise to a new, perhaps unsettling paradigm where humans and AI aren’t so much partners as they are competitors. It’s not hard to imagine a job market, he says, where AI agents are classified as a form of employee, alongside full-time, part-time, contract, freelance, and other categories of workers. “The pieces are there for AI agents to be thought of and compete for jobs on equal footing with humans,” says Ackermann.

To be sure, AI is still many years from replicating many critical human skills, particularly in creativity and problem-solving. But data shows that a future may not be far off in which AI agents handle a wide range of high-level tasks better than humans do. According to the World Economic Forum’s Future of Jobs report, 41% of CEOs globally plan to reduce their workforces in the next five years because of AI. Among the positions most at risk are bank tellers, accountants, legal secretaries, and claims adjusters. One bank estimates about half of all banking and insurance jobs could be lost to AI. Why hire a staff of finance officers if an AI agent can balance the budget, seek out investment opportunities, negotiate deals, and file taxes?

Paul Dinan, global technology market advisory leader at Korn Ferry, says recruiting and hiring AI agents will become the norm in the years ahead. “Companies aren’t just experimenting,” he says, “they’re actively seeking AI agents to fill roles.” Dinan is still optimistic, however, that AI will become a superpower rather than kryptonite for humans. If generative AI first appeared in the workplace as an intern, to use office hierarchies, then rose to associate, it’s now more like a peer. Dinan’s vision of the future workplace sees humans and agents working together in high-performing teams. “Some roles will be replaced, but more of them will focus on collaboration,” says Dinan, noting that agents will have to be developed and managed just like other employees.

But in the meantime, hiring AI agents is not likely to sit well with people who were laid off in recent years and are still looking for work. Ackermann says there’s bound to be a backlash as more AI agents show up in the workplace, particularly if it’s to replace human colleagues rather than to augment employees’ job performance. He says that employees’ receptivity, and AI agents’ impact, will depend a lot on the direction leaders take and how it’s communicated to employees. “If leaders think of and solicit work from AI agents the same way they do people, it’s hard to imagine it being viewed positively,” says Ackermann.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Bryan Ackermann
Senior Vice President, Head of AI Strategy & Transformation

Paul Dinan
Senior Client Partner, Global Technology Market Advisory Leader

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by