The Most Important Skill Is… Conflict Management?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 26, 2025

The Most Important Skill Is… Conflict Management?

In the age of AI, a new study finds that many top skills employers are hiring for are surprisingly nontech.

Even in the age of artificial intelligence, when it comes to finding a job, many of the most sought-after skills appear to have little to do with the technology.

As companies transition to skills-based hiring and employees lean into training and development, the latest data suggests that firms are seeking skills that are decidedly human. Indeed, a new survey by LinkedIn of the 15 hottest skills on its platform shows a growing demand for people-driven skills. Sure, the list includes the skills you’d expect to see, such as “AI literacy,” which topped the list, and “process optimization,” which ranked fourth. But it heavily skews towards skills that technology can’t replicate, like “conflict management,” “public speaking,” “stakeholder management,” and “customer engagement,” all of which made the top ten. (Skills were ranked according to the rate they were added to profiles, the percentage of people hired in the last year with that skill, and the growth of the skill in job postings.)

Michele Capra, a senior client partner and vice president in the Recruitment Process Outsourcing practice at Korn Ferry, says that skills like conflict mitigation and public speaking are just two of the workforce muscles people will have to rebuild as they return to the office and rely more on AI for their work. So much communication takes place over screens or via text, she says, that she’s noticed clients asking more and more for a “verbal readout” of a situation. “Leaders want to know that they have people who can have confident conversations,” she says.

For his part, David Farris, sector lead for the Professional Services practice at Korn Ferry, says that he’s increasingly seeing a convergence of AI-driven and human skills. To be sure, other skills that made LinkedIn’s list—like “risk management,” “growth strategy,” and “innovative thinking”—feature elements of both. Right now, the human aspect of those skills is a more pronounced need, if only because what we feed into AI to help with scenario planning and decision-making will make it smarter and more capable in the future. “Skills are clustering and overlapping because of business change, not HR change,” says Farris.

Take “go-to-market strategy” as an example. Now that expertise in launching a product or service has become a critically in-demand skill, says Farris, related roles will require a blend of AI’s capacity to adapt to constantly changing consumer behavior and the human talent for framing solutions to drive market share and growth. “The need is the ability to have a more strategic conversation about where the market is headed, and figure out how to get there first,” he says.

To be sure, skills lists inevitably change, so career experts advise workers to stay flexible. Capra expects to see firms refine their skills-based hiring and training approaches this year. She has observed that leaders and hiring managers are getting more sophisticated about identifying the precise skills a role calls for. “More companies are focusing on a smaller set of critical skills that they need in a shorter time frame,” she says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Michele Capra
Senior Client Partner and Vice President, RPO

David Farris
Senior Client Partner, Global Account Leader and Sector Lead for Professional Services

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Leadership & Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by