Attracting Top Talent: A Workplace Flexibility Checklist

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Attracting Top Talent:A Workplace Flexibility Checklist

From hybrid working to customized benefits, today's top talent wants flexibility and autonomy. How does your workplace stack up?

​

Download the Checklist

Hybrid workplaces are the reality for 76% of the world’s office workers, according to Korn Ferry's most recent Talent Acquisition Trends Report.

And offering hybrid or remote workplace options makes good business sense, given that three-quarters of today’s workforce want to work away from the office some or all of the time.

For TA, this is particularly relevant, as 73% of people in our Workforce 2025 survey told us that workplace policy (that is, in office, from home, hybrid) is very important to them when choosing a new job.

But it’s not just about where the work takes place that will necessarily seal the deal when hiring. Today, many job seekers want more flexibility than just their working location.

If you’re hoping to secure top talent, it’s important to think bigger when it comes to policies around autonomy and adaptable work arrangements.

Are your policies and offerings enough to attract and retain the best of the best? Here’s how you can measure the impact of your current hybrid approach—and how to level it up.

Key Insights

​

What “flexibility” means these days (hint: it’s not just about working from home)

​

Why offering workers flexibility is more important than it’s ever been

​

How to know if your policies and offerings are enough to attract the best talent

What Flexible Can Look Like

There are many ways that workplaces can appeal to top candidates seeking flexible choices:

Hybrid or Remote Work: The ability to work from home or any location outside the traditional office.
Flexible Working Hours: Employees can choose their start and end times, as long as they complete their required hours and tasks.
Compressed Workweeks: Working longer hours on fewer days, such as four 10-hour shifts.
Job Sharing: Two employees sharing the responsibilities of one full-time position, allowing each to work part-time.
Flexible Time-Off Policies: Offering more responsive and adaptable time-off policies, such as the ability to take unpaid vacation days.
Customized Benefits: Employees can choose from a variety of benefits that suit their individual needs, such as health insurance plans or childcare.

Workplace Flexibility Checklist

Start Where You Are

Audit the benefits and policies your company currently has in place.
Survey candidates and employees to learn which of these initiatives they value the most, what they could live without, and what they’re missing.
Ask yourself which initiatives would be the most effective in attracting and retaining talent while allowing them to unleash their full potential. Try to gain an understanding of the diverse needs of a multigenerational workforce.

“You can’t take your eye off the ball when it comes to flexible work. You need to keep on top of what matters most to your people and always continue to innovate.”David Ellis, Senior Client Partner, Korn Ferry

Take a Reality Check

The sky’s the limit when it comes to workplace flexibility, but it needs to be grounded in reality. Ask yourself:

Does the nature of your work or regulatory requirements impact the types of flexibility you can offer?
Do you have the right technology, training, and leadership in place to make flexible hours and locations work effectively?
How will adding new perks and benefits change the cost of your rewards? What might need to be adjusted to keep costs in line?
Which organizations are competing for the same talent, and which flexible options are they offering?

“The most important questions are, ‘What is the work we need to get done, and what is financially feasible for us to offer?’ This will guide many decisions when it comes to how much employers can offer.” David Ellis

Keep Employee Equity Front of Mind

Not all jobs are created equal, but access to rewards should be equitable. Ask yourself:

What are the different employee needs and priorities based on life stage, seniority, and job function?
Which ideas work best for different job functions—for example, field staff obviously can’t work from home, but could you implement task-based vs. time-based working?
Do you have processes to ensure all employees have access to the same information and opportunities?

"Equity means understanding that one size doesn't fit all. By offering a range of flexible options, we can meet the unique needs of the workforce, fostering a culture of inclusivity and respect."David Ellis

Plan for Change...Then Plan for More Change

From remote work to customized benefits and everything in between, offering flexibility takes planning, investment, and significant change-management savvy to roll out effectively. Once your C-suite is aligned, plan for execution, measurement, and evolution.

Identify leadership champions to drive adoption and engagement within their teams.
Communicate clearly, early, and often to ensure candidates and employees are aware and engaged with what you offer.
Ensure your offerings are aligned with your organization’s EVP.
Seek continuous feedback from employees and monitor competitors to adjust as needed and uncover new opportunities.

“Getting the right mix of benefits in place reduces stress on employees and demonstrates that you see them as individuals. The result is happy people—and companies with high employee satisfaction attract skilled talent.”David Ellis

What Top Talent Really Wants

Like it or not, employees’ feelings around workplace flexibility are shifting.

In our recent survey of office workers around the world, 58% said having flexible work would be enough of a draw to stay in their job even if they hated it. And 66% said they’d quit if their organization’s workplace flexibility policy didn’t work for them.

Hybrid working is reshaping the workplace. To keep up with these changes and more, join us for an in-depth look at this year’s hiring trends in our on-demand webinar.

Download the Checklist

Want to Chat?

Get in Touch with a Korn Ferry RPO Expert
​

Related Insights

View All Talent Recruitment Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Human Resources

Cybersecurity

Digital

Talent Recruitment

Article

Featured Topics

Talent Acquisition Leader

Kornferry RPO

May 21, 2025
Insight Articles