The ‘Remote-Work Gap’ Widens

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 19, 2025

The ‘Remote-Work Gap’ Widens

Off-site jobs are increasingly being offered to high earners, creating a new gap between those who come into the office—and those who don’t.

In recent months, more companies have been cracking down on those who are based at home, instituting much sterner return-to-work mandates. But a new study shows that remote jobs are still out there—under a new model. According to a new survey, remote jobs are much more likely to go to workers earning above $250,000 per year: For this group, remote postings jumped by 15% in the last quarter. Indeed, one in six jobs offered to those earners are now fully remote. “Remote work is the new have or have-not,” says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, firms have always played favorites by offering cushy perks to the most sought-after employees. Awarding remote options to employees who are highly paid furthers that tradition. But the race to find employees with the right skill sets—and experience—is mounting as firms anticipate a looming AI wave that will restructure many operations. Indeed, according to the survey, in fields facing steep shortages of highly skilled employees—such as healthcare, science, and engineering—high earners are likely to apply for, and land, a remote gig. In contrast, the study found that applicants are unlikely to snag remote options in fields where high-level employees are easier to come by, such as sales, human resources, marketing, and media.

What’s more, some firms are looking for executives who are contemplating retiring or who have retired but are now thinking about returning. Data in the Korn Ferry Workforce2024 report showed that employees who might otherwise consider retirement are particularly keen on remote options. But experts say offering remote options to high earners is a risky proposition, especially as firms continue to broadly push return-to-office mandates. Insisting on in-office positions for most workers, while offering remote options to those who are highly sought after, creates a double standard, they say. “You really don’t want to inadvertently develop two sets of rules,” says organizational strategist Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

The gap threatens to cause permanent damage if a culture of haves and have-nots comes into being, says Tamara Rodman, senior client partner in the Culture, Change and Communications practice at Korn Ferry. “It creates a breeding ground for resentment and distrust,” she says. She compares remote, highly paid employees to leaders housed in an upscale private office far from the team’s cubicles, behind doors teammates must knock on for access. The resulting sense of unfairness can linger and lower morale. The situation is accentuated when the person with special privileges is a leader. “It creates a perceived say-do gap,” says Rodman.

Experts advise focusing on culture building that allows groups to coalesce and diminishes friction between them. This is best accomplished when the remote employee is highly accessible and visible, and consistently spends meaningful in-person time with the team. “The key is to bridge the psychological distance,” says Rodman. These shared experiences shift the focus away from work arrangements and onto the team’s exciting work dynamic. “Culture can absolutely be built remotely if you’re intentional,” says Amato.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Tamara Rodman
Senior Client Partner, Culture, Change & Communications

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Leadership Development

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Agribusiness

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by