5 Ways to React to Quick Changes

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 2, 2025

5 Ways to React to Quick Changes

Changes, shifts, and reverses to those shifts are widespread and furiously paced this year. Here’s how to react.

The news drops: International relations with a country have soured, leading to steep costs. Or an initiative is suddenly closing down. Or some funding is on ice. The changes might become permanent long-term policies, or they might reverse… tomorrow, next week, or next year. How is a leader to respond when uncertainty reigns?

Even amid a decade of constant change, the business world seems to be moving and swerving a great deal in 2025. Indeed, the last two days alone could be the harshest proof of all. You can attribute this to a host of geopolitical actions, or blame tariffs, or point to the shadow of artificial intelligence that’s looming over business operations and staffing. In response, leaders “are trying to keep resources and employees focused in key directions” and on key goals—says Chad Astmann, co-head of global investment management at Korn Ferry—while also focusing on the organization’s middle- to long-term goals. But it’s not easy.

Our experts share their thoughts on how leaders can move their firms forward during this turbulent period.

Be well-prepared for change.

“In my 27 years in business and nine years as a Navy fighter pilot, preparation is the red thread for adapting to change quickly,” says Chris Cantarella, senior client partner and leader of the Global Software sector at Korn Ferry. Change, he says, is only problematic if the firm is unprepared for it, which means that teams must be well staffed and well trained.

Don’t respond immediately.

His number-one recommendation lately has been to take a deep breath, says Andrés Tapia, global DEI and ESG strategist at Korn Ferry. He advises that it’ll likely take some time to sort out what will stick and what will fade away; meanwhile, there may be a certain degree of confusion. In his view, there’s typically no need to respond immediately, but if people are worried, spending time with stakeholders internally is critical.

Acknowledge the news.

Silence is golden—but not now. Sure, you’re not responding publicly, but that doesn’t mean you’re not talking. Leaders can tell stakeholders that they are aware of the shifts, says Astmann. While the situation is being assessed, they can also offer reassurance that no action will be taken without careful consideration. Think responsive, not reactive.

Maybe tell employees a little more.

“In uncertain times, employees want to know what’s going on,” says retail expert Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. He advises sharing all information that can be imparted with confidence and clarity, while being candid about the unknowns. “Employees understand,” he says. When formal communications might further confuse or overwhelm, he suggests using corporate-officer meetings for information sharing—for providing officers with tools and approaches for delivering key messaging to employees at standing team meetings. This strategy avoids framing the matter as a Big Deal To Panic About, instead presenting it as an issue normal management processes can address.

Maybe skip the media for now.

“Don’t be too vocal in the press,” says Astmann, who notes the risk of damage to the organization’s reputation. Offering comment immediately is a particularly bad idea in a highly fluid situation in which there’s a possibility that statements may have to be publicly reversed. That’s a messy path best avoided. As long as uncertainty reigns, any discussion, lobbying, and pushback is potentially best directed internally and toward back channels.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career-development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Chad Astmann
Co-Head of Global Investment Management

Chris Cantarella
Senior Client Partner, Global Technology Markets, Global Sector Leader, Software

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by