Unplug at Your Own Peril

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 20, 2025

Unplug at Your Own Peril

A new study finds managers think employees who set boundaries outside of the office are less committed and less promotable. What that means for work-life balance and career advancement.

Turns out unplugging from work is good for everything but your career.

In a study that underscores the dangers of unconscious bias in the workplace, researchers at USC found that managers consistently rated employees who unplugged from work as both less committed and less promotable. The researchers presented managers with various scenarios involving two employees of equal stature: For example, one employee left an automatic reply—while on vacation or after working hours—saying that they wouldn’t be returning messages in order to prioritize their mental health; the other employee made themselves available no matter the circumstances. The results: Regardless of the rationale, managers held a more negative view of the employee who unplugged, even if they were a better performer or had no work to do outside of the office.

The study, which was purely an academic exercise, may illustrate what leaders value in practice versus what they say they value in theory, says Miriam Nelson, a senior client partner in the Assessment and Succession practice at Korn Ferry. “While a leader may value work-life balance, the value they place on achievement often wins out,” she says. To be sure, one of the paradoxes of the experiment, according to the researchers, was that the same managers who punished employees for unplugging also acknowledged the importance of work-life balance on engagement, performance, and culture. Nelson likens this dichotomy to the conflict many leaders experience between their firm’s long-term strategic goals and Wall Street’s short-term profit needs. “It’s the tension managers feel between wanting employees available when they need something, versus their long-term well-being,” she says.

To be sure, managers may be under more pressure than ever before, given both the decline in corporate growth and recent cutbacks in their ranks. Some may find it difficult to consider work-life issues when their own situation has become so challenging.

That said, the study highlights changes in power dynamics in the business and hiring landscape, says Renee Whalen, North Americaconsumer market leader for professional search at Korn Ferry. It was only a few years ago, in the aftermath of the pandemic, that leaders struggled to find new hires while explicitly promoting the virtues, for both employees and organization, of work-life balance and remote work. Now, however, leaders are pushing employees to return to the office full-time and actively seeking ways to cull the workforce, whether through layoffs or AI. “The pendulum has swung back to employers,” says Whalen. “They have more power now, so they are discouraging unplugging.”

The study’s implications for real-world manager-employee relationships go beyond work-life balance and career advancement. Korn Ferry senior client partner Maria Amato says the attitudes the study uncovered could further fray trust and discourage transparency between employee and manager. “If you unplug, the results suggest you are better off not addressing it with your manager,” she says. Conversely, not explaining why you are unplugging (or for how long) could lead managers to think you are slacking off. As the study’s authors write, “[Managers] value visibility and responsiveness as a proxy for dedication.”

Experts agree that the best way to address work-life balance is by setting expectations together with your manager. Some examples: Establish in advance what your manager feels is the appropriate time to respond to an after-hours email, and ensure that any work that’s due while you’re unplugging is covered, says Anya Weaver, a Korn Ferry principal consultant.

For managers, experts say, the most important thing may be to reframe their mindset—from hours worked to outcomes. Firms can also assess the effects of unconscious bias in performance evaluations related to unplugging, set formal policies on after-hours communication, and even encourage managers to set an example and unplug themselves. “Leaders need to recognize that they can’t have employees who are refreshed and productive if they’re always on,” says Nelson.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Assessment and Succession capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Miriam Nelson, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, Assessment and Succession

Renee Whalen
Senior Client Partner, Market Leader

Anya Weaver
Principal Consultant

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Talent Acquisition

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Assessment & Succession