A Bold (or Risky) Response to Roiling Markets

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 7, 2025

A Bold (or Risky) Response to Roiling Markets

Even amidst the economic uncertainty, dozens of firms are raising their dividends. Will going on the offensive work?

It did indeed seem as if April was the cruelest month. Battered by tariff announcements, the stock market went on its wildest ride since the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, predictions of lower corporate profits and a tough economy got louder.

But none of that stopped some 60 individual firms from going big—some of them announcing increases to their stock dividends, others their new share-repurchase plans. Experts say these decisions to increase financial payouts can be seen as an aggressive move to try to attract and retain investors who might otherwise be deterred by plunging or highly volatile share prices. “It can be good for attracting shorter-term, higher-volatility investors,” says Jeff Constable, leader of Korn Ferry’s Financial Officers practice in North America.

The moves sharply contrast with those of many other companies that—citing economic and global-trade uncertainty—have withdrawn financial guidance and limited share-buyback programs. Still, dabbling with dividends at any time of year can be a risky step, considering that the S&P 500 spent more than $629 billion on them in 2024, up 6% from the year before. One dividend increase can lead investors to expect that others will follow as a matter of routine. In fact, these same companies may later need to cut the dividends, which will have the effect of pushing away the investors they’re courting. “Dividend increases are not something that you can sustain quarter after quarter without figuring out how to pay for them,” says Peter McDermott, head of Korn Ferry’s Corporate Affairs practice in North America.

Without a doubt, plunging stock prices right after the tariff announcement drew immediate concern from investor-relations executives, CFOs, and board directors. In general, dividend increases have slowed. In the first three months of 2025, in fact, they were 14% less than the same period in 2024.

Analysts at S&P Dow Jones Indices, which monitors stock trends, said the current economic environment likely limited dividend growth. They said further that uncertainty over global government policy, employment, and inflation may keep companies from making big financial commitments, whether geared toward growth (such as expanding factories) or paying shareholders (such as a dividend increase).

For his part, Chad Astmann, co-head of Korn Ferry’s Global Investment Management practice, says this is a tricky moment for firms weighing dividend decisions. “The uncertainty around tariffs and interest rates alone should give CFOs pause,” he says. Meanwhile, regardless of broader market movements, McDermott advises executives to be in constant contact with Wall Street analysts and investors, to explain how their company intends to navigate the current environment—whatever that environment may be.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Financial Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jeff Constable
Office Managing Partner, Senior Client Partner, Co-Leader Global Financial Officers Practice

Peter McDermott
Senior Client Partner, Global Corporate Affairs and Investor Relations

Chad Astmann
Co-Head of Global Investment Management

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by