There Goes the Fun

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 17, 2025

There Goes the Fun

Eighty-two percent of workers report lower job satisfaction as AI takes over not only the boring but also the interesting work.

There’s the sales guy who loves searching for new leads. And the archivist who enjoys flipping through academic journals. And the scientist who contentedly spends weeks dreaming up study designs.

That was in the Before Times. This year, some workers are finding their roles to be increasingly hollowed out, as artificial intelligence absorbs not just their most tedious responsibilities but also the ones they love. Indeed, an unexpected trend is emerging: An MIT study of over a thousand scientists in R&D at a major US firm found that though AI-assisted research fueled huge gains, scientists reported less engagement with their work. The numbers are daunting: 82% of scientists reported less satisfaction, despite a 39% increase in patent filings and a 44% boost in discovery of materials. “Yes, AI may be able to shortcut some of those processes, but at what cost?” says Kendra Marion, vice president of global assessment services at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, technological breakthroughs like gen AI have improved many workers’ lives by shouldering hours of repetitive tasks, particularly in roles that involve a lot of them, such as sales. But the MIT study suggests that one man’s drudgery is another man’s fun, and experts worry that job enjoyment will diminish. This, of course, is in contrast to the original prediction that AI would become a “partner” for many workers by taking over only their most tedious responsibilities. “Disengagement is a real risk. People are just going to lose interest in their jobs,” says Purbita Banerjee, senior vice president of product management of Korn Ferry digital and RPO.

The underlying issue has less to do with employees and more to do with their roles: The very nature of many jobs is changing. Over time, experts say, job candidates will naturally self-select for the roles that they enjoy. But in the interim, teams are shifting attention and hours away from the nuts and bolts, like presentations and assessments, and onto actual doing. “It’s a case of who moved my cheese,” says Maneesh Dube, a senior client partner for Korn Ferry, referring to the best-selling book. “Everyone’s experimenting.”

Experts say that it’s critical for managers to identify which parts of jobs employees love—a task that can be trickier with high performers, says Marion. “What motivates them—creativity, brainstorming, solving difficult challenges—is all part of the ‘fun’,” she says. That enjoyment pays off, in the form of invested employees who work harder and stay. She advises firms to allow employees to find their own ways of incorporating AI into their work, so that they can preserve the parts they enjoy. “This allows for the best of both worlds,” says Marion.

And for every beloved task, there is a hated one. Banerjee suggests reframing the situation with employees: Rather than seeing new technologies as stealing favored tasks, employees can embrace them for handling to-dos that they “might not be loving,” she says. “Leverage it on those tasks that require self-discipline.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kendra Marion
Vice President, Global Assessment Services

Purbita Banerjee
Senior Client Partner, Head of Product Development, Korn Ferry Digital & RPO

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development