The Early Careerist: Maximizing Our ROI

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

The Early Careerist: Maximizing Our ROI

In a new column, Korn Ferry Institute’s own Gen Zers, Chloe Carr and Emily Gianunzio, team up with Korn Ferry’s Iain McAdam to share insights on increasing ROI with Gen Z talent.

The revolving door of tech advancements is driving today’s working world, leaving companies with a big question: How can they get the most out of their youngest generation of workers?

Raised in the digital age and shaped by the COVID-19 pandemic, Gen Z brings both unique strengths and limitations to the table. Some see our generation as a source of valuable new perspectives, while others argue we’re not quite ready to jump into the workforce. One thing everyone agrees on, though, is that businesses need smart strategies to engage, develop, and empower this emerging talent. After all, we’re all on the same team, and getting the best out of Gen Z today means success for both the individual and the organization tomorrow. We’re eager to start our careers and make a difference, but we can’t do it alone.

Early Career Buffering...

Gen Z brings fresh energy to the workplace with a deep connection to technology and a passion for change.

We’re more comfortable than other generations with building relationships in a digital world. While some argue remote work limits interaction and development, Korn Ferry’s upcoming Workforce 2025 survey found that 63.1% of Gen Zers feel strongly connected with remote colleagues, compared to just 44.3% of Baby Boomers—showcasing our adaptability in a virtual workplace. We also lean into ambiguity with agility, viewing innovation as instinctive. Constant access to diverse information—heightened by social media and global connectivity—fuels our creative problem-solving, while our strong sense of social responsibility pushes us to seek out companies that share our values. Above all, we’re committed to continuous learning and growth.

Despite our strengths, Gen Z faces some gaps in interpersonal skills—and not for the reasons people think. Sure, we grew up with tech, which influenced how we communicate, but we’re also the same generation that spent our formative years learning online because of pandemic shutdowns. We didn’t choose this; it was forced on us. Virtual proms, online orientations, remote classes with recorded lectures—all of that shaped our mental health, how we interact with the world, and how we now work. In fact, a third of Gen Z respondents in a Korn Ferry survey feel that their company doesn’t provide enough mental health support for employees. Instead of judging us, leaders can show empathy and meet us where we are.

Gen Z missed out on years of typical educational and workplace socialization, making it hard for us to pick up office norms and meeting etiquette. That’s why we place a high value on mentorship, development, and career advancement. In fact, 76% of Gen Z employees say learning and development is a key factor in their work engagement, according to Korn Ferry data. Having a mentor can make a huge difference in both personal growth and overall job satisfaction. Compared to workers without mentors, mentored employees are twice as likely to feel they’ve developed and stayed motivated and 98% more likely to recommend their company, according to a 2022 Gallup survey.

Supporting Gen Z's growth and development is about providing the support network and environment we need to be successful. In-office interns and recent grads eager to learn and make connections can often find themselves alone, with experienced employees choosing to work remotely. Remote teams can also face challenges with asynchronous work, leaving little room to connect or hold working sessions. Senior colleagues shouldn’t underestimate how much Gen Z employees can learn by being in the same room or meeting. Experienced employees can invest in and support their less seasoned coworkers by coming into the office more or allowing us to shadow virtual client and colleague meetings. These are valuable learning opportunities, but we have to be invited in.

Another hurdle to jump can be generational clashes in the workplace. Stemming from different communication styles and work approaches, these clashes often lead to misunderstandings and frustration. While this isn’t unique to Gen Z, fast-changing tech and social media can amplify the tension. We see it in everything from jokes on TV to flippant remarks from coworkers or family members. Nearly 83% of Gen Z participants in a Korn Ferry survey say they experience leadership bias based on age, which can make us feel "picked on." But we all want success—companies and Gen Z alike. When we start to understand and empathize with each other, we’ll be one step closer to making it happen.

Downloading: 5 Strategies to Empower Gen Z

Bridging the generational gap at work isn’t just about companies adapting to new norms and development processes. It’s also about taking responsibility for the next wave of talent. Great leaders understand that part of their role is guiding, supporting, and investing in those coming up behind them. And helping Gen Z grow and succeed strengthens teams and improves overall performance.

Here are five strategies to empower Gen Z and set everyone up for long-term success:

Curate Learning and Development (L&D) experiences. Gen Z thrives on fast, interactive learning that is inclusive of neurodivergence. Embrace microlearning, gamification, and AI-driven content to create engaging, bite-sized lessons that work for us—and likely other generations too. Personalizing development paths helps us build confidence and stay motivated.
Practice mentorship and reverse mentorship. Pairing Gen Z with seasoned employees is a win-win. We gain valuable insights from experienced colleagues while sharing our expertise in emerging tech, social media, and trends. This two-way mentorship builds stronger connections across generations and sparks new ideas.
Empower our strengths. Gen Z’s tech fluency makes us perfect for AI-driven projects and digital innovation. Give us opportunities to contribute to tech initiatives, brainstorm, and collaborate with inclusive cross-functional teams. When leaders believe in us, we feel more engaged and ready to make an impact.
Promote purpose and inclusion. We want to work for organizations that reflect our values. Show your commitment to inclusion, sustainability, and social impact by involving us in meaningful initiatives, especially those we care about most. Gen Z is more invested when we feel supported by our company and see our work driving positive changes.
Teach us with on-the-job learning strategies. Learning should be adaptive and immersive, not sink-or-swim. Invite Gen Z employees to observe key meetings, shadow experienced colleagues, and ask questions without fear of judgment. Including us, even as observers, helps us build confidence and prepare us to lead when it’s our turn. Sometimes, the best ways to learn are simply by seeing and doing—and this should happen both in in-person and remote environments.

Rebooting: Future LeaderZ

Instead of seeing Gen Z as “problem child” employees, companies should view us as assets to innovation, culture, and long-term growth. Like all generations before us, we are the future of work, and we need both guidance and a voice.

With the right support, we'll push boundaries, redefine norms, and drive new growth. But it’s not just about the future of Gen Z. It’s about all of us coming together, collaborating, and learning from one another. Only through teamwork can we achieve success that lasts for generations to come.

For more information, learn more about Korn Ferry’s People Strategy capabilities.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Iain McAdam
VP Korn Ferry Hire and Global Early Careers

Chloe Carr

Communications Specialist

Emily Gianunzio

Research & Solutions Integration Analyst

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Future of Work

People Strategy & Performance