With Shortages Nearing, Dreaded Conversations Begin

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 30, 2025

With Shortages Nearing, Dreaded Conversations Begin

The ongoing trade war means firms from auto-parts manufacturers to retailers may soon be telling customers and clients they’re out of stock. How to have that tough talk.

It’s one of the most uncomfortable conversations a leader can have with a customer: telling them that the product that they need is going to be more expensive, or worse, is out of stock. And experts say there’s no real playbook for how to have this talk.

But it’s a dialogue that organizations—from auto makers to hospital suppliers to retailers—might be having sooner rather than later, with trade wars already reducing exports to the United States significantly. The Port of Los Angeles, the nation’s largest, expects scheduled vessels to be down more than 35% this week versus the same week in 2024, with further declines coming. An executive for the port says that shipments from China for manufacturers and retailers have essentially stopped. Already, some companies have begun telling customers, with varying degrees of success, that they soon won’t be able to get what they want at the price that they’re used to. “There’s no best practice on this, so there’s going to be a lot of trial and error,” says Richard Marshall, global managing director for Korn Ferry’s Corporate Affairs and Investor Relations Center of Expertise.

Some organizations tried to stock up on inventory before the tariffs went into effect. Indeed, January saw a 34% year-over-year increase in the import of industrial supplies, along with an 8.3% increase in consumer goods and a 5.5% increase in capital goods, according to US government data. But even with that front-loading, many organizations are looking at their inventory and wondering how long it’ll last. According to the Port of Los Angeles, major retailers have about 90 days’ worth of inventory on hand. But many other organizations have far less.

Most major retailers have been low-key with customers about the tariff impacts, mostly because they don’t know how the situation will play out, says Craig Rowley, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in retail. “Most of the communication has been to the investment community who wants to know how business will perform,” he says.

Still, at some point, if inventory runs low, companies are going to think about what to tell customers. Experts say that the organizations should lean towards being transparent and explain that the situation is uncertain. They’ll have to decide how much of a given tariff they’re willing to absorb and how much they’ll pass along to their customers. Regardless of their strategy, companies should be clear about both the process and their actions. An added wrinkle to consider: blowback from either customers or government officials. When a report emerged this week that a major retailer would display the cost of US tariffs for individual products, a US government official blasted the move (the retailer denied it was taking such an action). “If you’re called out, that might change the calculus to your customers,” Marshall says.

Sam Tepper, a Korn Ferry senior client partner and Sales Effectiveness advisory practice leader, says the right approach to customers depends on the type of relationship an organization—or individual salesperson—has with them. In business-to-business relationships, phoning the customer to keep them abreast of inventory issues might go over much better than sending an email, or not saying anything at all. “Proactively get ahead of this. You don’t want to blow up their budgets without warning,” Tepper says.

Savvy salespeople also can try to use this conversation to enhance their relationship with customers. Instead of just reporting that there’s a shortage, consider offering potential alternative products, rearranging ordering times, or other potential solutions. “You can co-own the problem with them and help build a trusted partner relationship,” Tepper says.

The situation is similar to the COVID-19 lockdowns five years ago, when quarantines around the world delayed the delivery of goods. But while the pandemic itself was tragic, few doubted that it would eventually pass and global trade would return to normal. Now, however, no one knows what the future of global trade will look like. The disputes could end this week and things could resume as before, or it could take years for manufacturers and retailers to reshore production facilities to areas with lower or no tariffs.

That means that this awkward talk might not be a one-off. Marshall says that companies may need to regularly update customers on developments within their own supply chain, especially where essential products, such as medical supplies, are concerned.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Sales Transformation capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Talent Acquisition

Agribusiness

Automotive

Consumer Products

Retail

Software & Platforms

Technology

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by