5 Ways to Find a New Career Niche

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 12, 2025

5 Ways to Find a New Career Niche

One-third of workers plan to switch jobs in the next six months—but the smart candidates will find a new niche and skill set to market themselves.

If you thought that your career path was fairly set, think again: Career paths are experiencing churn across industries, as job-market competition heats up. This year, the hiring market—fueled by government layoffs, AI’s replacement of certain jobs, and ongoing industry disruptions—is expected to be particularly challenging for applicants. Hiring in January slowed, down 14% from fall averages. Yet over one-third of employees expect to change roles in the next six months, according to a survey of 22,000 workers across sixteen countries; among young employees, the figure jumps to 47%. Simply put, many candidates need to find unique niches to gain an edge.

Experts say that the first step is to redefine “career path”: Job development is a lifelong process, full of disruptions, reassessments, and increasingly long and winding paths. “It’s easy to see why this can be a de-motivating and stressful time for most,” says business psychologist James Bywater, senior client partner at Korn Ferry—especially, he adds, if loss of earnings or insurance is involved. But midcareer revamps are becoming typical, even if they require some navigating. Our experts share their advice on how to explore a new career niche:

Identify Actual Interests.

Early careers are typically fueled by a passion for data or a love of language. Ten or twenty years later, however, your day-to-day tasks may have little to do with those initial interests. So what do you really enjoy doing? Bywater suggests sitting down and thinking about what you would like to do in your ideal next role—not just the job title, but the daily tasks—as well as your inner motivations. “Really take some time as you do this,” he says.

Take on Projects in Fresh Areas.

“Reinvent what you’re known for,” says human-resources expert Liz Schaefer, a practice leader for the Professional Search division at Korn Ferry. Taking on projects that allow you to gain experience in new spaces will quickly enhance your reputation.

Look for Adjacencies.

These all sound like major shifts, but there’s no need to reinvent the wheel; instead, start thinking about new ways you might apply your skills within your current firm. It’s much easier to pivot within the company where you’re already working, says Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry, because you’re already known and trusted there. “People will be more willing to take a chance on you than a new employee,” she says.

Find Firms That Love Your Ex-Employer.

If your current firm isn’t an option, seek out companies that frequently hire away talent from one of your ex-employers. “The new company has high regard for the ‘pedigree,’” says Amato. Search LinkedIn for companies meeting this description, and apply to them.

Network, Network, Network.

You’ve heard it before, because it’s true: Despite the proliferation of online job boards, word-of-mouth referrals still account for a large percentage of hirings, and many listings are never published publicly. “Networking is just crucial,” says Bywater.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

James Bywater
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

Elizabeth Schaefer
Senior Client Partner, Human Resources Officers Practice, Executive Search

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career