Connectorship

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|May 12, 2025

Connectorship

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison says leaders most often can’t create meaningful connections by accident.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

Same place, same time—years ago. And neither of us had any idea….

I met recently with an executive who I didn’t know. As we talked, I was intrigued to learn he was passionate about music.

“I used to perform,” he told me.

“Just curious—what was the strangest experience you’ve had on stage?” I asked him.

With that he gave me a puzzled look—clearly not sure where I was going with this off-the-cuff question.

To fill the pause, I stepped in. For me, there was only one answer. So, I quickly rattled off everything I remembered: “Royce Hall—UCLA. There’s this world-famous pianist—playing Rachmaninoff’s Third Piano Concerto. And suddenly… he just froze up. Wouldn’t play another note. The entire place was stunned into silence.”

With every detail that punctuated my story, the leader interjected—speaking more to himself than to me: “Yeah, yeah, yeah… that’s exactly what happened that night.”

Then he delivered the punchline: “I was there—playing cello in the orchestra.”

My jaw almost dropped.

No doubt, life and leadership are filled with experiences that are equal parts coincidence and happenstance. However, the art of connecting in meaningful, authentic ways requires intentionality and effort.

Our firm’s psychologists call it connectorship—and there are three dimensions involved: trust, authenticity, and organic shared experiences.

For leaders, it may be more natural to think about setting strategy and driving growth. But how often do we really think of creating connections—looking up from spreadsheets and looking out to people, relationships, and the experiences we share?

It’s the emotional side of leadership—and it never goes out of style. Nor can it be replaced, even with tomorrow’s technology.

Research shows that people hunger for connection and thirst for friendships. It’s our human nature. In fact, time and again, studies show that most people have fewer friends than they want.

So, what bridges that gap? It’s possible the void can be filled in part as AI becomes intertwined in our lives—offering more connections than people currently have. But AI cannot truly replicate what it genuinely feels like to be loved, to belong—and share experiences.

For leaders, there’s a lesson here.

Over the years, while traveling overseas on business, I have seen the musical Mamma Mia! multiple times, in different countries.

Often, I am not able to understand one word, but I always feel an overarching sense of connection through an emotional shared experience of song and story. Complete strangers, not even able to speak the same language—always dancing in the aisles together to the songs we all know so well.

And that brings us back to that unforgettable night when everyone in that UCLA concert hall—audience and performers alike—held their breath. As we sat there, the conductor slowly walked over, leaned down, and whispered something to the pianist. After hearing those words, immediately this star performer played with a passion that was palpable to everyone.

Throughout the performance, one question lingered on my mind: What did the conductor say? What could he have possibly uttered that turned the entire performance around—from silence to symphony? Later I learned of his simple but profound message: “We do it because we love the music.”

That’s the power of the experiences we share—and the connections we create.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by