Talent 2.0: Reimagining How Talent Drives Success

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Talent 2.0: Reimagining How Talent Drives Success

The world has changed. Talent and succession management is finally catching up.

The world of work has changed dramatically in recent years. What hasn’t changed is the way we approach talent and succession management. The issue is not only that our methods are outdated—it’s also that for all the time invested, most companies are still left without a clear answer to whether they have the talent and successors they need, when and where they need them.

Over the past two years, Korn Ferry has collaborated with leading global companies and academic institutes to understand how the most innovative companies have reimagined their talent and succession management by embracing the following three fundamental shifts:

1. From Static Planning to Dynamic Talent & Succession Management

Innovative companies move beyond outdated processes to real-time talent strategies that solve their most pressing business challenges. They do this through:

Business-Aligned Talent Strategy: Their talent and succession process focuses solely on driving business outcomes and ensuring business continuity even in turbulent times.
Agile & Predictive Talent Decisions: AI-driven insights help them forecast risks, anticipate gaps, and provide real-time talent solutions instead of reactive planning.
Expanding the Definition of Talent: Success isn’t built by the top 3% to 5% of employees alone. They tap into broader talent pools, recognizing diverse types of potential across their organization.

2. From Ownership to Access: The Rise of Talent Ecosystems & Teams

Innovative companies rethink how they acquire, develop, and deploy talent—moving beyond the traditional employment model. They do this by:

Ending the “War for Talent”: They no longer seek to “own” talent. Instead, they build ecosystems to ensure they “have access” to the right capabilities—when and where needed.
Putting Super Teams Over Superheroes: They recognize that high-performing teams—not individual superheroes—are the backbone of success. They shift their talent and succession management to optimize team performance and cohesion.
Redefining Careers and Growth: Employees expect careers on their terms. Innovative companies have created transparent, self-directed pathways to growth.

3. From Process-Driven HR to Human-Centered, Business-Embedded Impact

Innovative companies radically reimagine human resourcesto deliver value where it matters most and balance the needs of both their people and the business. They do this by:

Developing Radically Human Talent Strategies: They have built transparent, fair, and engaging talent processes that empower employees and build trust.
Designing for Experience, Not Just Efficiency: Their talent strategies are built to serve both the needs of the business and the employees.
Abolishing Traditional HR Silos: The prevailing HR model is being replaced with agile, cross-functional teams focused on solving business problems. Traditional HR COEs cease to exist.

Unlocking Business Value through Innovative Talent Management

Companies that embrace these shifts don’t just manage talent; they create a competitive advantage through their talent and succession approaches. And they deliver an outsized impact:

Up to 20% increase in productivity
Twice as agile in responding to market changes
25% lower employee turnover
Two and half times more likely to have a strong talent pipeline

When companies adopt impact-focused, dynamic, ecosystem-based, and human-centered strategies, they can significantly boost productivity, agility, and employee retention while ensuring a robust talent pipeline. Put another way, these talent and succession management shifts drive sustainable business success in a rapidly evolving market.

Click the image to download the full report.

To learn how Korn Ferry helps companies transform their approaches to talent and succession management, read about our Talent Management capabilities.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ken Kunkleman
Senior Client Partner, North American Advisory

Maggie Patrick
Director of Organizational Research, Korn Ferry Institute

Simon Bailey
Senior Principal

No items found.

CLICK IMAGE TO DOWNLOAD PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Workforce Management

Organization Strategy

People Strategy & Performance

Succession Planning

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by