The Art of Praising Your Boss

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 5, 2025

The Art of Praising Your Boss

There’s a skill to complimenting bosses sincerely—without appearing fake. And it can mean a lot to your career.

It’s tough being a boss in 2025. Seventy-one percent of managers and leaders report increased stress from last year, and of those, four in ten have considered leaving their roles to improve their well-being, according to the 2025 DDI Global Leadership Forecast.

Bosses are particularly receptive to validation, because many of them so rarely get it. “It’s often one-sided, with the manager complimenting the team underneath,” says supply-chain expert Seth Steinberg, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. The compliment-free zone only grows as leaders, climbing the ladder, receive even fewer compliments from their own bosses.

This leaves the door wide open for team members’ praise to have an impact, says enterprise coaching expert James Arnum-White, associate client partner at Korn Ferry. The question is how to offer such praise without coming off as a phony and making things worse. Being truly genuine, and winning the boss’s favor, can help build long-term trust, experts say. “A well-timed compliment can go a long way toward building a supportive environment where you both thrive,” Arnum-White observes.

From Korn Ferry’s experts, here are a few tips on how to offer your honest flattery to the boss:

Imitate.

What does your boss (and their boss) complain about or compliment? “Those are likely sore points, so a compliment will be extra meaningful,” says organizational strategist Maria Amato. Recognizing these soft spots requires close attention over a period of weeks or months, she adds: “There’s not one across-the-board right answer.”

Watch your timing.

The opportune moment for a compliment is immediately after the praise-worthy behavior, says Steinberg. “The morning of your performance review, it might come off as a bit self-serving.”

Make it specific.

Steinberg advises giving genuine feedback, specific to a decision or action you appreciate—the more detailed, the better. “Any seasoned manager can spot when they are being puffed up,” he warns.

Go for quality over quantity.

Too many compliments will look like kissing up, especially in a culture where compliments to bosses are already rare. “Fewer genuine and meaningful compliments go a lot further,” says Arnum-White.

When in doubt....

You can’t go wrong complimenting a manager’s ability to make coworkers shine. “It’s often relevant for managers whether they bring out the best in others,” says Amato. You’re welcome.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

James Arnum-White
Associate Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career