5 Ways to Become a ‘Career Daredevil’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 23, 2025

5 Ways to Become a ‘Career Daredevil’

When the market quivers, experts say that bold actions may actually be the best move for job candidates and career climbers.

Last week, amid stock-market instability, searches for the word “recession” tripled on Google. Naturally, most job candidates have decided to play it safe—to be more conservative about where they apply. But experts note that companies like Airbnb, Groupon, and Uber were all founded during the Great Recession, and that big risks can bring big rewards in moments of market uncertainty—for job applicants and careerists alike.

For sure, it’s a hirer's market. As companies become increasingly tech driven and specialized, experts counsel against sending out dozens or hundreds of résumés in the hope that they’ll get you where you want to go. “That’s insane,” says Chris Cantarella, global sector leader for the Software practice at Korn Ferry. “Stop posting your name and résumé on job boards.” Rather than relying on the ol’ “spray and pray” method to land your next gig, Korn Ferry’s experts say that now is the moment to make smart, big moves. Here are some of the ones they suggest.

Repackage yourself.

What problem do you help companies solve? What gap do firms have that you fill? You’re a product on the hiring market, and need to be marketed as such. Experts advise that you closely analyze industry dynamics, in addition to studying gaps at particular companies. Yes, this is time-consuming. “It’s very hard to know enough about what a company’s going through to be ready to talk about it in an interview,” says Cantarella. Still, that’s the main task when focusing on the product development of you.

Join a start-up.

Or start one. In downturns, talent is readily available at lower cost, operating expenses are lower, and competition is less intense—while seed funding often remains available. Whether you’re formalizing your side hustle or joining a fledgling tech firm, do yourself a favor and “be very clear about what roles you’ll play and not play,” says Patrick Reilly, an executive coach at Korn Ferry. For example, if you don’t like fundraising, make sure that’s not one of the many hats the job would require you to wear.

Focus on long-term compensation.

Cash is in short supply at many firms. If you’re keen to scoop up a salaried job, then trade short-term cash for longer-term incentives. “It will make you stand out as more appealing and aligned with the company’s goals,” says Maneesh Dube, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

Volunteer in-house.

If you’re lucky enough to be employed, now is the moment to volunteer for a big in-house role that the organization needs. “Show your willingness to take one for the team, even if it’s not your biggest turn-on,” says Reilly. Whether you volunteer to be a cross-functional project lead or head an employee-resource group, taking on a big role brings visibility, learning, and job security.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career-development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Chris Cantarella
Senior Client Partner, Global Technology Markets, Global Sector Leader, Software

Maneesh Dube
Senior Client Partner

Patrick Reilly

Executive Coach, Korn Ferry

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career