The Premium Price for Interim CEOs

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 20, 2026

The Premium Price for Interim CEOs

The number of interim CEOs at big firms has jumped sharply. So has their pay.

It’s great to be in demand, especially if you’re an interim CEO.

With CEO exits hitting record numbers in recent years, many firms are opting to bring in interim replacements to fill the void. And that sudden demand is placing a premium price on these executives—as high as 150% to 500% of a permanent CEO’s equivalent annual salary. Indeed, according to one study, median interim-CEO pay rose 19% in 2025 compared to 2021. Among S&P 500 CEOs, it doubled.

To be sure, interims are not receiving long-term rewards, which may balance out the premium. But experts say many boards are struggling to figure out the right salary to offer them, especially in such a competitive market. While boards and lawyers have historically spent months hashing out a permanent CEO’s pay details, they no longer have that luxury. Indeed, paying an interim too much—or too little—is a big concern. “Clients often don’t understand the financials behind an interim,” says Monte Weirman, president of Korn Ferry’s North America Interim business.

The stakes are high: The number of CEO departures this year is only slightly off last year’s record pace, and organizations continue to seek out interim replacements. To date, 2026 has seen high-profile interim appointments in industries such as media, retail, hospitality, beverage, and non-profit. Interim executives are often installed on relatively short notice to shepherd the organization through crises or major transactions, such as mergers. About 20% of interim CEOs subsequently fill the post permanently, says Mike Distefano, CEO of Korn Ferry’s Professional Search and Interim businesses.

Still, since interim CEOs are, in theory, only going to be with the organization a short time, they aren't offered the same long-term equity incentives as a permanent CEO, says Tom McMullen, leader of Korn Ferry’s North America Total Rewards expertise group. Given that such long-term incentives often constitute most of a permanent CEO’s compensation, organizations tend to pay top interim executives a higher cash salary. Depending on an appointment’s structure, the executive might be officially employed not by the organization they’ve been asked to lead, but rather by the professional-search organization that found them.

The urgency of a company’s need for leadership is a key factor, experts say. If the situation has reached crisis level, the price will be higher, Distefano notes. “If it’s a planned situation, then the compensation is a little more pragmatic,” he says. It also matters which skill sets and experience the firm needs. The critical mass of CEO departures has created a decent supply of former top leaders, some of whom may be amenable to taking on an interim role. But some organizations need such a high degree of specialization that their field of candidates realistically consists of just one or two people.

The best way for a firm to save on interim costs is to hire someone internal—but not every firm has someone ready to step up.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Interim Talent capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Monte Weirman
Managing Partner

Michael Distefano
Chief Executive Officer, Professional Search & Interim

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Interim Talent

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

People Cost Optimization

Assessment & Succession

Board & CEO Services

Total Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by