A Tasty Innovation Whose Time Has Come

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 17, 2025

A Tasty Innovation Whose Time Has Come

How spotting a consumer need, like stuffed-crust pizza, can be critical in this economy.

Food prices are through the roof. Consumers are cutting back on dining out. On the corporate side, growth is slowing. At a time like this, there may only be one answer: More cheese, please.

That’s the approach of one of the biggest pizza chains in the world, which recently added stuffed-crust pizza to its menu for the first time ever. To be sure, the innovation isn’t the extra cheese as much as it is the timing, say experts. After holding out on the stuffed-crust trend for three decades, the chain’s decision to add it to the menu creates buzz among people desperate for deals—loyal and new customers alike. Or, as Chris Von Der Ahe, a senior client partner in the Consumer Markets practice at Korn Ferry, puts it: “Consumers, especially younger ones, see stuffed-crust pizza as an indulgent offering they can afford."

To be sure, it can be hard to figure out consumer tastes, and the stuffed-crust craze could end overnight. But to date, stuffed-crust pizza has added hundreds of millions of dollars in annual revenue for pizza chains, experts say. The trend also aligns with a recent development in consumer behavior in which longtime customers leave brands for more affordable options or perceived value. (Not offering a stuffed crust can cost pizza chains millions in customers, analysts say.) In that way, even though stuffed-crust pizza is a retro trend, “it can foster engagement and loyalty while providing a new experience with the brand,” says Peri Hansen, leader of the Consumer Products sector and Marketing Officers practice in North America for Korn Ferry.

Other companies are also focusing on timing their innovations to market trends faster. Brands—particularly large, established ones that are losing customers to more agile competitors—are all looking to cut product-development timelines down, says Alexandra Blakeslee Hartwell, a principal in the Food and Agribusiness practice at Korn Ferry. She says companies are using AI in research and development to derive deeper insights that will allow them to shape new products and segment consumers to target them more quickly. “One of the big themes in innovation is using AI to capitalize on trends quickly,” says Hartwell

Innovation doesn’t just have to be around products either, says Adam Rosner, a principal in the North America Consumer and Travel, Hospitality and Leisure practices at Korn Ferry. In crowded markets with large legacy brands, getting to scale quickly is crucial—driving sales by revamping customer-loyalty programs, innovating marketing promotions, creating seamless experiences, and more. “It’s innovation combined with value and convenience that provides the differentiators and keeps you top of mind,” he says.

Hansen agrees, adding that in addition to playing into what she calls the “treat culture” trend, stuffed-crust pizza taps into the prevailing anxiety people have about the economic and geopolitical environments. “People migrate to comfort food in times of uncertainty and stress,” she says. Using teenagers and college kids to illustrate her point—18-to-25-year-olds order more pizza annually than any other demographic—she adds, “What’s more comforting than sharing a stuffed-crust pizza in the basement or dorm-room lounge with friends?”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Chris Von Der Ahe
Senior Client Partner, Consumer Markets, Managing Partner, Los Angeles

Peri Hansen
Senior Client Partner, Sector Leader, Consumer Products, North America, Leader, Marketing Officers Practice, North America

Alexandra Blakeslee Hartwell
Principal, Food and Agribusiness

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Workforce Management

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Professional Services

Retail

Agribusiness

Consumer Products

Kornferry7 TR

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by