A Blast of Top-Down Management

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 19, 2025

A Blast of Top-Down Management

More leaders are taking tougher stances with workers to speed up business. Will it work?

Collaborative. Empathetic. Consensus building. For most of this century, these have been among the key elements of effective corporate leadership. But in a remarkably short time, many top leaders are changing their style—and workers have noticed.

Under pressure from a new business climate that seems to be changing at hyper speed, as well as from government leaders’ abrupt policy shifts, CEOs and other bosses at some of the biggest firms are making use of a more traditional, but also controversial style: a so-called “directive,” top-down approach to management. It’s been seen, for instance, in companies’ increasing strictness about return-to-office mandates, as well as, more recently, in the blunt public comments of CEOs criticizing underperformers and pushing for faster results and greater compliance.

“Directive is old-world leadership,” says Kevin Cashman, Korn Ferry vice chairman of CEO and enterprise leadership, who views it as one—not the only—management style leaders should turn to. Indeed, leadership researchers say that the directive approach is most effective when applied to simple, straightforward tasks, or when dealing with chronically underperforming team members. But it can also backfire quickly: It can turn off high performers and rally staffers against company goals. “To say that directive is the preferred style is like saying an athlete should only use one move in all situations,” says Cashman.

To some degree, experts say, many leaders may feel cornered by a host of growing pressures, including a record number of activist campaigns focused on short-term results and an employee base that feels empowered to criticize their own companies on social media. Other experts point out that during the Great Resignation—when employee job-hopping spiked—leaders had to build more consensus than they might have preferred, lest they lose too many employees (or fail to attract enough). Now, many CEOs are taking a more authoritative approach, at least for the moment. Particularly in the tech and finance industries, leaders have been swift to restructure org charts, eliminate underperforming divisions, and set aggressive productivity standards. Layoffs have slowed, but companies haven’t been shy about eliminating entire layers of management.

A top-down approach, of course, has been in vogue for much of the history of corporate America. Leaders like Jack Welch, Henry Ford, John Rockefeller, and Steve Jobs—all highly successful over the long term—didn’t prioritize consensus building or empathy with stakeholders. Over time, and particularly in this century, scholars have postulated that such leadership styles can lead workers to feel bullied and to refuse to buy into a leader’s vision. “The directive style should always be used in small doses,” says Paula Kerr, a director in the Korn Ferry Institute.

Indeed, directive styles of leadership were used, with great effectiveness, during the early days of the pandemic, when CEOs needed to act quickly, without concern for consensus building. “It is possible that some leaders may use a more directive style under a narrow set of circumstances,” says Sarah Hezlett, a Korn Ferry Institute vice president of assessment science, North America. Regardless of the style leaders prefer, she says, they shouldn’t rely exclusively on one. Within the context of the situation their teams are facing, they should choose the style that will most effectively energize and engage them. “With leadership styles, more is better,” Hezlett says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kevin Cashman
Vice Chairman, CEO & Enterprise Leadership

Sarah Hezlett
Vice President, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by