A Slump in Britain’s Hiring

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 6, 2025

A Slump in Britain’s Hiring

Corporate plans are changing fast in the UK as the economy slumps and jobs are scarce.

Two years ago, British companies couldn’t find enough people to work for them. It was the Great Resignation of 2022, and salaries soared.

But things have changed dramatically since then. New job vacancies in the UK have dropped by a staggering 23% through the end of November versus the same time last year, according to data from job-posting website Indeed. Britain is also far behind other rich countries such as Germany, Ireland, the US, and Canada, in which job openings dropped between 5% and 15% over the same period.

The British jobs slump is due to the economic slowdown, with growth falling to 0.1% in the third quarter, down from 0.7% at the beginning of the year. The Business Confidence Index has also fallen, from positive in the second quarter to pessimistic in the second half of the year.

“The recruiting tap is turned off,” says Tim Manasseh, Korn Ferry’s senior partner, EMEA, for global consumer products. “It is an historic period of shake-up.” He cites several issues that have contributed to the current situation, including higher payroll taxes. He also says Britain’s general election last summer caused some business uncertainty, as did the war in Ukraine, higher energy prices, and the introduction of artificial intelligence into commerce.

Overall, companies large and small say they are being financially squeezed as sales slow and costs of materials increase. Inflation hit 2.3% in September, which is above the Bank of England’s policy target of 2%, and up from 1% the previous month, according to government data. Some companies are saying they don’t know how they can continue to compete because of across-the-board costs, says Stuart Richards, sector leader for consumer products in the UK and EMEA. “It isn’t going to be a spending spree on new talent,” he points out.

Instead of hiring new workers, savvy executives are choosing to invest in developing the existing staff, Manasseh says. These employees already know the company culture, and internal investment will likely be less expensive and more tailored to specific roles. “It’s a build-versus-buy approach,” he says. Other leaders are deciding how many people their firm needs to employ on a sustained basis and how many can be interim contractors. “It’s to plug specific gaps that can’t be delayed,” Manasseh says.

No matter how executives approach the changing employee landscape, experts say there are some things that can help calm the workplace. Clear communication to staff at times of tremendous uncertainty is necessary, says AJ van den Berg, a Korn Ferry London-based senior client partner who advises business leaders on how to navigate the disruptive change. “It’s the responsibility of the executives to keep morale up and to move the organization into a growth environment,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Talent Recruitment capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Stuart Richards
EMEA Market Leader, Consumer Industry

AJ van den Berg
Senior Client Partner, London

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Talent Acquisition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by