Now It's Thanksgiving ‘Week’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 25, 2024

Now It's Thanksgiving ‘Week’

A combination of workers extending their holiday with an already short season might stymie firms’ pursuit of their year-end goals.

Thanksgiving is just one day. So are the Fourth of July and New Year’s Day. But don’t tell that to a lot of workers—and their managers.

In a trend that just keeps growing, many workers, along with their managers, are stretching one-day holidays into a full week off. Some are using vacation time, but the days off have also become de facto work holidays in the eyes of many leaders, who don't press the issue. Experts say the change is helping improve work-life balances, but may also threaten the odds of firms reaching their year-end goals.

In the US, and at many multinational firrms, many employees took off the three days before Thanksgiving. Many firms are closed on the Friday immediately afterward. That means that the previous Friday was the last workday in November for many people. The solution? “Recognize that time is short,” says Mark Royal, a Korn Ferry Advisory senior client partner, adding that

December could be a real crunch. Indeed, the month includes only about 15 days on which leaders can expect to have most of their teams working.

Whether it’s Thanksgiving or Labor Day or a handful of other holidays, experts say that a fundamental change in vacation patterns is leaving leaders scrambling to cover critical work in unprecedented ways. The phenomenon involves workers and managers of all ages, but experts say it's been embraced by Gen Z most of all, with its emphasis on work-life balance. “There’s a generational shift going on here,” says Kate Shattuck, a Korn Ferry managing partner.

To be sure, experts say the additional time off isn’t necessarily a bad thing. “We believe this is positive, both for employees’ mental health and the retention of talent,” says Radhika Papandreou, Korn Ferry’s president of North America. Plus, flexibility around when and where they work has become increasingly important to employees worldwide. Indeed, the 10,000 professionals who took part in Korn Ferry’s Workforce 2024 survey said that flexibility was the most important benefit a new employer could offer them—above generous compensation or even job security. “Flexibility is one of the reasons people stay or leave,” Royal says.

To get through the end-of-year period successfully, experts suggest that leaders prioritize team coordination, blocking out time where all team members—or most of them, at least—can work on group assignments. The goal here is to minimize the number of projects left hanging because of a key person’s absence. After coordinating teams, leaders should encourage workers to use the remaining time for individual projects.

While emphasizing what needs to be done between now and the end of the year, leaders should consider publicly highlighting what has gone well in 2024. Building a sense of accomplishment, and recognizing those who did the work, can help motivate employees to finish the year well, Royal says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Employee Experience capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

Radhika Papandreou
President, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Organization Strategy

Professional Services

Kornferry7 TR

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by