Natural Disasters: A New Call to Purpose

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|February 3, 2025

Natural Disasters: A New Call to Purpose

Best-selling author Dan Goleman examines what happens when high-powered leaders lose their reason for working.

Daniel Goleman is author of the international best-seller Emotional Intelligence and Optimal: How to Sustain Personal and Organizational Excellence Every Day. He is a regular contributor to Korn Ferry.

At the time of this writing, California was burning. For almost two weeks, parts of Los Angeles were ablaze – entire neighborhoods destroyed. Climate scientists say the “Pyrocene” is here, a term coined by fire historian Stephen Pyne to describe the epoch of time in which large destructive fires become an experience we learn to live with.

The Pyrocene, scientists warn, is a direct consequence of human behavior, not a random occurrence. Climate-change experts have long cautioned that our manufacturing, energy, and consumer habits would lead to a time of dwindling rainfall, increased heat, and intense winds.

Every year, more businesses feel the impact of these changes on their bottom line. According to multiple sources, climate-related disasters have already caused over $3.6 trillion in damage over the past 25 years. One analysis estimates that climate-related issues could drive $560 to $610 billion of fixed-asset losses by 2035. Depending on the degree to which emissions can be controlled, this number could rise to $1.1 trillion within the next three decades.

A recent report from the World Economic Forum points out the many ways in which “climate inaction comes at a cost.” The report, which outlines trends, predictions, and leadership behaviors is a “call to action for CEOs to redefine their approach” – not by simply avoiding risks, but by playing an active role in innovating, restructuring their operations, rethinking their processes and building resilience for society. The report encourages business leaders to “act boldly and decisively,” recognizing that their decisions today will “not only shape the future of individual businesses but will also determine the trajectory of the global economy and the future of our planet for decades to come.”

In many ways the report is a call to purpose – a plea for leaders to step up, look at the data and think about how their efforts serve the greater good.

Bill McKibben, one of America's foremost environmentalists, told Forbes that "The climate crisis is a test of whether the big brain was a useful adaptation—or, more precisely, whether it’s attached to a big enough heart to get the job done."

The “heart” McKibben refers to may be the least discussed aspect of purpose-driven leadership, the idea that in order to care about something beyond numbers a leader needs to, well, care.

In the fall of 2024, Forbes assembled a list of 50 individuals who are at the forefront of efforts to address the climate crisis. This list included leading entrepreneurs, scientists, funders, policymakers, and activists. To ensure the legitimacy of the list and avoid greenwashing, Forbes enlisted a panel of renowned climate experts to assist in identifying those who are making a significant impact in their respective fields.

Care is exactly what these leaders have in common. For example, since Whole Foods CEO Jason Buechel assumed his role in 2022, he has been pushing for the diversion of unused food from landfills to redistribution programs. He has also made the company's plant and floral vendors adhere to guidelines around chemical use, and he has saught to increased the impact of Whole Foods Market Foundation, which focuses on supporting smaller and more marginalized farmers in being able to grow and sell organic.

“The future of our food systems is in jeopardy, and what we do today will determine how we feed future generations,” wrote Buechel in a LinkedIn post after the most recent Climate Week NYC.

But heart likely isn’t Buechel’s only driver, and it doesn’t need to be. Purpose-driven leaders know that caring about a bigger purpose doesn’t preclude caring about the bottom line. In his post, Buechel pointed to a recent YouGov Behavioral survey showing that 70% of Gen Z supports climate-smart agricultural practices. As any intelligent leader knows, the more a company aligns with their consumers, the more likely they are to succeed.

Among all the climate-related changes, the most pressing issue continues to be extreme heat followed by a lack of water. For companies operating in warm climates, the question may eventually become one of relocation. But before the “Pyrocene” blazes across the entire earth, leaders have a choice. They must decide what meaningful role they can play in mitigating the harm.

Co-written by Elizabeth Solomon

Click here to learn more about Daniel Goleman's Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Daniel Goleman
Contributor, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

People Strategy & Performance