Where Did Promotions Go?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 20, 2024

Where Did Promotions Go?

Promotion rates are down 23% in two years, to roughly one employee in 10. How can firms motivate the disappointed?

The manager thought that this year was definitely the year: She had brought in big earnings for the company, and closed an unexpected deal. So she trotted into her boss’s office and made her case for a promotion in the New Year.

Experts say that she should prepare to be woefully disappointed: Promotions will be few and far between this year. Just one in ten employees are getting promoted, which is down 23% from 2022. This, says Tom McMullen, a leader of Korn Ferry’s North America Rewards practice, will likely lead to some workers departing. “There is a very real risk here,” he says. Indeed, a lack of upward trajectory is a top-three factor in employee retention and engagement, according to the Korn Ferry Global Employee Opinion database, which tracks 6.8 million employees at over 500 firms.

To be sure, firms struggle with promotions. “There’s always the potential for sour grapes,” says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry, because supply usually runs short of demand. But these days promotions are truly becoming a rarity among higher-ranking employees: They tend to heavily skew toward early-career employees, creating prolonged waits for senior, managerial, and executive workers.

This year, promotions are down, in part, because firms are adopting flatter management structures—which inherently have fewer slots for promotion. The slower job market of the past year has led employees to stay put, meaning that new spots aren’t opening up. Meanwhile, employee costs have continued to rise, while company profits have not. “Firms are looking long and hard at cutting and consolidating jobs,” says retail expert Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

Some see the scarcity of promotions as an unintended consequence of employees pushing for other perks, such as improved benefits packages and more days off. Most companies budget for employees’ total rewards, which include compensation and benefits. “There’s an intersection of the streets of affordability and talent strategy,” says Ron Seifert, leader of the North America Workforce Reward and Benefits practice at Korn Ferry. “Ideally, there’s some kind of stop sign to minimize incidents.”

Only about half of employees feel that their firms handle promotions fairly, according to the Korn Ferry Global Employee Opinion survey. The situation can unravel quickly for the employer when employees begin to look elsewhere and go through the process of articulating why. “Being asked in an interview why you want to leave tends to crystallize it,” says business psychologist James Bywater, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

Experts advise managers to offer alternate career-advancement avenues. For example, if promotion is not possible, a manager might connect employees with training and development opportunities, as well as brief them on where their futures lie in the company. “You want people feeling pretty confident that they can reach their objectives within the organization,” says Royal.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

James Bywater
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Organization Strategy

Professional Services

Kornferry7 TR

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by