Manufacturing’s Hiring Funk

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 12, 2024

Manufacturing’s Hiring Funk

The sector’s unease around expansion—in people or projects—is holding back innovation and talent needs. Will recent news turn things around?

Just how rough has it been in America’s manufacturing sector? For seven straight months (and 23 of the past 24), manufacturers, as a group, have been taking fewer orders, drawing down existing inventories, paring back their workforces, and otherwise shrinking their business. In October, 20% of firms reported having lower head counts than they had in September, while nearly 30% reported fewer new orders.

Erik Olson, Korn Ferry’s senior client partner and the firm’s industrial manufacturing lead, can sum the sector pretty easily: “It’s stagnated,” he says.

Even as the artificial-intelligence and consumer-products sectors make business headlines, core industries—including automobile manufacturers, textile mills, appliance makers, plastics producers, and fabricated-metal producers—have quietly been in a funk for years. And it’s taking a toll on the job market: Companies are leaving a huge number of roles open while they wait hopefully for business to pick up. At one point in 2023, 55% of advertised US manufacturing roles were vacant, according to the World Economic Forum (the percentage has marginally declined over the past year).

Experts attribute the sluggishness to multiple factors. Uncertainty around trade and the US election has convinced some manufacturers to slow down expansion plans, says Seth Steinberg, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in global supply chains. The bigger reason, however, is the high-interest-rate environment. For more than a year, the rate on ten-year T-bills, which many companies use as a benchmark when taking out loans to finance projects, has hovered at around 4%. That’s a high cost of capital, Olson says, compared to five or 10 years ago.

The election is over, of course. And the Federal Reserve has already cut rates twice this fall. But experts say several more cuts would be needed to bring financing rates low enough to make manufacturers consider taking out additional money for expansion.

On the bright side, food and beverage makers—the firms that produce the stuff sold at grocery stores and served at restaurants—have been on a tear, with US consumer spending holding steady over the last couple of years. Meanwhile, computer and electronics production (specifically, semiconductor manufacturing) has seen a surge in investment, thanks to billions in US government subsidies in order to invigorate domestic production. But even semiconductor manufacturers are facing issues; for instance, the industry could have expanded even faster if there hadn’t been a shortage of highly skilled employees. “If you need a couple of hundred electricians or machinists to finish building a factory, you’re going to have a really hard time finding them,” says Paul Fogel, a Korn Ferry sector leader specializing in software roles.

Experts say that manufacturers should not wait for business to pick up before embarking on innovation projects. Multiple new technologies, including artificial intelligence, could bring more efficiency to factory floors while also helping workers to brainstorm new products. But while high-tech sectors are pushing innovation, many other manufacturers are not. In a recent Chicago Business Bulletin survey, only 14% of petroleum producers said they were engaging in innovation activities. Fewer than half of paper companies, metal producers, and printers made similar claims. Given that only 20% of manufacturers were able to bring new products to the market over the last year, that lack of innovation is already showing up.

Olson says that declining interest rates might spur some investment and innovation, but few firms are being particularly aggressive at the moment. “A lot of people are sitting on cash,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Manufacturing consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Erik Olson
Senior Client Partner, Industrial Manufacturing Lead

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

High Performing Executive Teams

Board & CEO Services

Leadership Development

Agribusiness

Automotive

Aviation & Transportation

Chemicals & Materials

Energy & Natural Resources

Infrastructure

Logistics & Transportation Services

Metals & Minerals

Manufacturing

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by