The Fight Over AI Is Just Beginning

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 2, 2025

The Fight Over AI Is Just Beginning

Investment and returns AI aren’t the only concerns raised by AI. Why leaders should expect more employee protests and legal actions, among other challenges.

This is one of Korn Ferry's Under the Radar trends for 2025. You can read about all these trends here.

It happened in Hollywood. It happened in Big Tech. It even happened in the shipyards along the Hudson River in New Jersey. And it is going to happen at many more companies, and in many more industries, in the New Year: worker protests over the use of AI.

While Wall Street analysts are focused on the billions of dollars firms are pouring into AI and investors are pressuring leaders to start showing a return, experts say that employee protests are one under-the-radar issue leaders will face more often as they ramp up plans for AI in 2025. “Rising employee activism could lead to more strikes, unionization efforts, or reputational risk,” says Alan Guarino, a vice chairman in the Board and CEO services practice at Korn Ferry. To be sure, many people see AI not as a new skill to learn, but as a threat to be resisted. But it isn’t just job security and wages that will bring on challenges—geopolitics, sustainability, and DEI are just some of the other areas where employees already have objected, or could soon object, to how AI is deployed, say experts.

Another under-the-radar issue that will impact companies is more class-action lawsuits. “It’s going to be a field day for lawyers,” says Chris Cantarella, global sector leader for the Software practice at Korn Ferry. So far this year, 13 AI-related class-action lawsuits have been filed, an increase of more than 50% from 2023. Among the allegations are everything from copyright infringement to algorithmic discrimination in hiring to misrepresentation of AI’s capabilities. Two factors will expose companies to all sorts of legal challenges, says Cantarella: that these organizations are learning about AI on the go, and that they have a historical tendency to overreach with new technology. “It’s impossible to do a risk audit on AI,” he says. “You can’t see where the bias is until it is found out.”

Leaders and boards are trying to mitigate risk by employing a governance framework around AI use at the enterprise level and guardrails at the employee level. But the reality is that more and more employees are using AI without their managers’ knowledge or the proper training. Cantarella says this “quiet use” of AI is a major problem that could result in privacy and data breaches and other legal and reputational risks unless firms get a handle on it.

While the top-of-mind issues involving AI are around investment, building capabilities, and reskilling talent, these sleeper issues have the potential to disrupt and distract business and stakeholder relationships. Trust between employer and employee is already frayed, and as the use of AI accelerates, the challenge every leader and firm will ultimately face is what to do with productivity and efficiency gains, says Bryan Ackermann, head of AI strategy and transformation at Korn Ferry. Do they lay off more people? Do they reward employees with better work-life balance? Do they adjust roles to reflect the excess capacity AI may soon provide to workers?

How this all plays out depends in large part on how leaders and firms engage workers, address their concerns, and align AI use with purpose and values, says Ackermann. How employees are valued, and how that value is realized, will be among the fundamental leadership issues underscoring AI-driven transformation. “What voice will talent have in their fates?” he asks.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Alan Guarino
Vice Chairman, CEO and Board Services

Chris Cantarella
Senior Client Partner, Global Technology Markets, Global Sector Leader, Software

Bryan Ackermann
Senior Vice President, Head of AI Strategy & Transformation

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Year of the Stealth Payroll Cut
Boards in Survival Mode
The New Hybrid Hierarchy
Equity Compensation: Not Just for Executives

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Tech Talent

AI in the Workplace