CEOs, Don’t Skip the Networking

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 22, 2025

CEOs, Don’t Skip the Networking

Even at Davos, many top corporate leaders shun networking. That’s a big mistake, experts say.

What do you do if you’re one of thousands of important people—including 1,600 business executives (more than 900 CEOs among them) and several hundred government leaders—who are gathering in a small Swiss town for a few days?

You had better network, experts say, or you might miss out on a massive business opportunity or insight. “There is real value for executives at the peak of their careers to continually expand their networks,” says Alan Guarino, vice chairman in Korn Ferry’s CEO and Board Services practice.

Networking—the practice of actively expanding and maintaining a group of professional connections—is virtually every senior professional’s go-to advice for any early-career employee. Networking is about developing relationships and exchanging information and, over time, it’s a far better way to find new career opportunities than just polishing a résumé, experts say. Formal or informal, networks enable an exchange of ideas about industry trends, regulatory issues, and best practices, says Joe Griesedieck, vice chairman and managing director of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice.

Yet many CEOs and other executives skip networking, be it at the World Economic Forum in Davos (happening this week) or other high-profile confabs. Ego is involved, of course; these leaders are already at—or near—the top, so who could possibly help them? Others fear that a request for help might be seen as a sign of weakness. Executives have privacy concerns, too—that by talking about certain situations, they might inadvertently reveal critical information.

But interacting with leaders in other industries can expose them to different perspectives or new approaches to problem-solving. As long as the executives aren’t direct competitors, they’re unlikely to go so far into the weeds that they reveal trade secrets.

An executive can network in many of the same ways an early-career employee can—by sitting next to someone at a forum, asking someone to chat over coffee, sending an introductory email, or grabbing a few minutes to talk at a conference. Experts say savvy leaders also can expand their networks by soliciting ideas from former team members about anything, such as potential new talent, that might help their business. There’s a reciprocal benefit: These former employees or other network members can discover their own business opportunities during these conversations.

Executives also can take advantage of a growing variety of senior-executive-only meetups. These small groups are designed to bring together high-powered executives from different industries to talk about common issues. They offer leaders an opportunity to candidly talk about theunprecedented number of so-called breaking points they face, among them increased geopolitical uncertainty, empowered employees, and a growing number of activist-investor campaigns. In these small groups, fellow executives provide an empathetic audience. “Networking at this level is critical to grow,” says Kevin Cashman, Korn Ferry’s vice chairman of CEO and enterprise leadership, who organizes these exclusive forums.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Alan Guarino
Vice Chairman, CEO and Board Services

Joseph E. Griesedieck
Vice Chairman, Managing Director, Board & Chief Executive Officer Services

Kevin Cashman
Vice Chairman, CEO & Enterprise Leadership

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development