5 Ways to Avoid Holiday-Party Slipups

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 10, 2024

5 Ways to Avoid Holiday-Party Slipups

More than half of companies are planning holiday parties this season, and experts say so much can go wrong for the unprepared.

They’re baaaack.

Office-holiday-party season is in full swing, and firms are celebrating in all kinds of ways. From small team gatherings to large catered blowouts to Zoom cocktails, leaders are experimenting with different formats and settings this year. Data from ezCater, a marketplace connecting business-party planners with restaurants and caterers, shows that 54% of company parties will host 100 or fewer guests, that one-quarter of companies are planning formal sit-down meals, and that nearly half of all parties will take place in the afternoon, during work hours.

For employees, navigating holiday parties always involves a delicate blend of personality and professionalism—and different settings can make them even trickier. “Managers and colleagues don’t always let you know what to expect,” says Mark Royal, a Korn Ferry Advisory senior client partner specializing in employee engagement. Here’s some advice our experts suggest following whether you’re at an intimate dinner or a winter-wonderland-themed party with a DJ spinning the latest dance hits.

Reach out beforehand.

Royal suggests reaching out to colleagues you are hoping to see at the holiday party ahead of time. Keep it short and informal—a quick text or chat saying you are looking forward to catching up is enough. “It’s another touchpoint, it can tee up some conversations at the event, and it might serve as a nudge for the people you’d like to meet to attend,” he says.

Be a good sport.

Two truths and a lie. Ugly sweaters. Karaoke. Whatever the activity, participate in it, says Korn Ferry Advance career coach Angela Galle Sylvester. "It gives you a natural opportunity to interact with different colleagues and start conversations,” she says, adding that you stick out more by not playing along.

Watch what you post.

Social media is a part of every holiday office party, but be careful what you post, say experts. Some employers encourage the use of certain hashtags as a way of building and showing off their corporate cultures, but remember that you are at a company event. Experts say to be mindful of the pictures you take and the ones you’re in, or they could come back to haunt you.

Put your phone away.

Relatedly, don’t go to your office holiday party and scroll through your phone the entire time, say experts. Unless you’re dealing with a major work or personal issue you can’t ignore, experts suggest putting your phone on silent and checking it only intermittently—for instance, when you step away to the bathroom or outside for air.

Don’t be the last one to leave.

It’s better to leave the holiday party early than to be the last one on the dance floor when the lights come on, says Val Olson, a career and leadership coach with Korn Ferry Advance. It depends on the setting of course, but a good rule of thumb is to stay for at least an hour and to leave at least an hour before the party ends.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Angela Galle Sylvester

Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by