When Thankful Meets Thoughtful

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|November 25, 2024

When Thankful Meets Thoughtful

Leadership, says Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison, means both inspiring others to believe and enabling that belief to become reality.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

Life, as in leadership, is not linear. From joy to heartache and all the moments in between.

Through it all, the constant is people. There are those who lift us up and stretch us. And, when we need it most—they believe in us.

During this season of reflection and giving thanks, it’s probably more natural for people to contemplate what it means to be grateful.

And yet, if we think about it, there is also deeper meaning to explore.

First, there is thankful—a feeling of gratitude. Transcending any one culture, tradition, or philosophy, thankfulness runs through all.

Then there is thoughtful—an action. It is the essence of being kind toward others.

One a feeling, the other an action. And we need them both. Otherwise, how could our words ever become actualized?

When thankful meets thoughtful, we know what that looks and feels like.

Just imagine—walking into a large, open room. At the center there is a long table. Then, as the scene comes into focus, you’re surprised to see that, seated in each chair, are some of the most important people in your life, the ones who helped you, inspired you, changed you.

As you look from one person to the next, you see an empty chair. That chair is an invitation for each of us.

By following the example of those who have elevated us, we aspire to be that person for whom others are genuinely grateful. After all, this is the essence of leadership: inspiring others to believe and enabling that belief to become reality.

To all our colleagues, clients, friends, and those we meet along the way, I wish you an abundance of joy, happiness, and love. And to those of you in the US, a heartfelt Happy Thanksgiving.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by