5 Signs Your Business Strategy Is Out of Balance

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

5 Signs Your Business Strategy Is Out of Balance

Is your business strategy drifting? The warning signs to look for—and how to rebalance priorities to support growth and business transformation.

Meeting current demands without sacrificing future results is one of the most difficult challenges CEOs face. The best leaders know they must perform today while simultaneously transforming for tomorrow.

What lessons can be learned from those who’ve mastered this balancing act?

The organizations on the 2026 World’s Most Admired Companies (WMACs) ranking stand out for one reason: they manage competing priorities better than their peers. Korn Ferry research shows they consistently balance five common yet critical tensions.

“There are patterns in how the World’s Most Admired Companies address those tensions through their decision-making, their processes, and where they spend their time,” says Mark Royal, North America senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “They follow these patterns more than peer companies.”

For chief executives, the challenge is spotting when short-term pressures start crowding out long-term priorities and stepping in before the strategy drifts off track.

The good news is that warning signs usually appear before serious problems develop—if you know where to look.

At a glance

The Situation

‍CEOs must balance short-term performance with long-term business strategy and transformation.

The Challenge

‍Competing priorities can push strategy out of balance, slowing transformation and limiting growth.

The Opportunity

‍By actively managing key tensions, organizations can realign priorities and strengthen long-term performance.

1. Today vs. Tomorrow: Are You Running the Business Without Changing the Business?

Like the tension between short-term results and long-term value creation, organizations constantly feel the pull between the tactical and the transformational. Tactical work addresses today’s operational demands, while transformational work prepares the business for tomorrow’s opportunities and challenges.

Leaders are expected to do both—to perform today while transforming for the future. Yet there’s a natural tendency to prioritize the present over the future.

When leaders spend most of their time responding to immediate demands, the future slips further out of reach. Transformation slows, key initiatives lose momentum, and the work that would strengthen the business long term keeps getting postponed. Over time, that pattern builds something dangerous—strategic debt, the growing cost of ignoring changes that everyone agrees are necessary, but no one has the capacity to prioritize.

How do you balance short-term results and long-term business strategy?

The right incentives can help. Financial rewards tied to long-term KPIs, for example, encourage leaders and managers below the C-suite to devote time and resources to initiatives that may take years to pay off.

You might be winning the quarter, but losing the decade if…

Executive compensation is heavily weighted toward annual financial performance.
Continual fire drills, such as last-minute pushes for quarterly results, are commonplace. “It's like being on a hamster wheel,” says Royal. “You never get out of the cycle of short-term thinking so that you can step back and consider how to transform the business for long-term growth.”
The list of transformation priorities keeps growing, but the time and attention leaders devote to them does not. In the 2026 WMAC research, leaders at the World’s Most Admired Companies were more likely than their peers to say the majority of senior leadership effort is focused on long-term transformation rather than short-term performance.

2. Speed vs. Control: Are You Moving Fast but Braking for the Wrong Things?

In competitive markets, organizations feel pressure to innovate faster and make decisions more quickly.

At the same time, they must maintain enough control to protect quality and finances.

But the tools that increase control often slow execution, while greater speed can weaken oversight. And, as any driver knows, too much speed leads to accidents.

How can leaders balance speed and control?

The WMACs outpace their peers by focusing tight controls on areas of strategic importance or high risk. Surprisingly, these controls include more time spent on scenario planning, compliance, and regulatory activities.

“In some instances, going slow to go fast makes sense,” says Royal. “The trick is to pick the few checks and balances that really matter rather than overloading an organization with bureaucracy and layers of approval.”

At the same time, WMACs reduce friction where possible, maintaining a manageable set of priorities, clarifying decision rights, and—for instances of less importance—fostering autonomy and accountability at the local level.

These companies also measure speed differently. For instance, they’re more likely to focus on “time to value”—how long it takes customers to experience the benefits of a product or service—rather than simply how quickly the product is delivered.

Your business might be moving too fast if…

The same preventable problems recur, such as quality, compliance, or security failures.
Frequent urgent fixes consistently cause delays to planned work.
Executives feel constantly stretched, spending more time reacting to problems than improving how work gets done.
Work feels increasingly stressful and less rewarding, rather than engaging and motivating.

3. AI Efficiency vs. Value Creation: Are You Gaining Competitive Advantage or Merely Cutting Costs?

Unsurprisingly, AI integration ranks among the most pressing challenges cited by executives at the WMACs and their peers alike.

But there is an important difference in how they approach it.

WMACs take a growth-and-productivity approach. They use AI to create new ways to deliver value to customers while also freeing up time for higher-value work.

Conversely, peer companies are more likely to focus primarily on efficiency. Those efficiency gains may tempt some organizations to reduce headcount—but that can backfire.

Organizations on the WMAC ranking are more likely to maintain staffing levels that support innovation and transformation.

“The companies getting this right are thinking about how work is changing—and therefore how roles should change—instead of whether they should be eliminated,” says Royal.

Why do AI initiatives fail to deliver real business value?

“When companies give people AI tools without clear communication, change management, and leadership support, adoption suffers,” says Royal.

“We also see organizations encourage a lot of individual experimentation without capturing the best ideas and scaling them across the organization.”

Your AI efforts might be underdelivering if…

Roles stay the same: Individuals work faster, but their added capacity is not used for innovation or transformation.
Workflows do not change: AI improves existing processes but doesn’t create new ones that generate real business value.
Measurable outcomes are limited: AI pilots are plentiful, but few initiatives scale across the organization.

4. Flexibility vs. Collaboration: Are You Losing Your People or Unlocking Their Potential?

Many organizations have seen that productivity doesn’t necessarily require physical presence in the office. They’ve also seen that in-person interaction strengthens collaboration and speeds up decision-making.

Still, many return-to-office (RTO) mandates have struggled to capture the best of both.

Why do return-to-office strategies fail?

“If employees are told to return to the office and don’t see the value, they can quickly become disengaged,” says Royal.

That’s exactly what happens when employees join virtual meetings from their office cubicles that they could have joined from home.

The World’s Most Admired are substantially more likely than their peers to require four or five in-office days a week. They reduce the risk of RTO backlash with a more deliberate and disciplined approach to in-office collaboration:

Employees tend to meet face-to-face rather than joining virtual meetings from their individual desks.
They use meeting time more to make decisions than to exchange information.
Their leaders model this approach, also protecting face-to-face meeting time for transformation initiatives.

Unlocking the benefits of in-person work may start with reframing expectations. Royal explains that instead of labeling days as “remote” or “in-office,” some organizations define them as “focus days” and “collaboration days.”

Your RTO mandate might be hurting more than helping if…

Employees spend most of their time in virtual meetings, even when they’re on-site.
Progress stalls as decision-making moves from one meeting to the next.
Engagement declines and attrition increases, particularly among high performers.

5. Talent Ownership vs. Stewardship: Are You Trapping People in the Here and Now?

Given the multi-employer careers of today’s talent, no organization can expect employees to stay for years, let alone decades.

Increasingly, companies are shifting their retention mindset from long-term to short-term. The focus becomes about maximizing the benefits each party receives for as long as the relationship lasts, rather than retention for retention’s sake. WMACs accomplish this by promoting talent stewardship over talent ownership among their execs and managers.

What’s the difference?

Talent ownership entails treating employees as personal assets to be deployed locally and protected from loss—whether to another team or another organization.
Talent stewardship treats talent as a shared asset that should be constantly developed and deployed wherever it creates the most value. Employee development initiatives, ample learning time, and support for lateral moves are common features of organizations that embrace stewardship.

Why do leadership pipelines weaken even when performance is strong?

Many businesses prioritize short-term operational results over long-term organizational development. That leaves little time or capacity to prepare the next generation of leaders.

At the same time, advancement pathways are heavily weighted to P&L roles, and ownership mentality deprives talent of varied experience. The result is leadership candidates with a narrow perspective and insufficient practice in transformational thinking.

You may be stunting your people and your business if…

Successors look like the leaders they replaced. By limiting the exposure of their people to other leaders and areas of a business, talent owners develop successors in their own image.
Technology and digital leaders exit disproportionately. A lack of internal mobility or investments in technology innovation will deprive tech workers of the continuous exposure to new problems and tools they crave.
Critical roles stay open too long. Qualified internal candidates are being hoarded by talent owners.

How to Strengthen Your Business Strategy for Long-Term Growth

Although all five of these tensions must be carefully managed as conditions and expectations change, balancing the competition between short-term performance and long-term value creation—the tactical versus the transformational—may be the most consequential.

The World's Most Admired Companies stand out because they protect the time, leadership attention, and organizational capacity required to transform while still delivering today’s results.

Want to Learn More?

Korn Ferry’s research on The 4 Critical Drivers of Business Transformation offers a deeper look at how strategy, leadership, culture, and operating models must align to turn long-term ambition into lasting value.

Learn More
​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Our Expert

Mark Royal, Ph.D.

Senior Client Partner, North America

FAQ for Pay Transparency

Are companies legally required to implement pay transparency?
Some regions and countries have enacted laws mandating pay transparency. For example, the EU Pay Transparency Directive requires employers to disclose pay information and address wage gaps, which must be integrated into national laws by 2026. In the U.S., certain states, including California, Colorado, and New York have passed legislation requiring salary ranges to be shared in job postings. These laws aim to promote pay equity, but regulations vary widely by region.

How does pay transparency help close the pay gap?
Pay transparency helps address wage disparities by promoting objective, data-driven compensation practices. When salary ranges and pay decisions are made public, it reduces the likelihood of biases—such as those based on gender or race—impacting compensation. Transparency ensures accountability, as employers must justify pay differences based on performance, skills, and experience, rather than subjective factors. Over time, this leads to more equitable pay structures and helps close the pay gap.

Can pay transparency reduce turnover?
Yes, pay transparency can significantly reduce turnover by fostering trust, fairness, and openness within an organization. When employees understand how their compensation is determined and feel that it is fair compared to their peers, they are less likely to feel undervalued or seek employment elsewhere. Transparency around pay also promotes employee engagement and retention by creating a culture of accountability and ensuring that pay aligns with performance and contributions.

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Organization Strategy

Healthcare

Life Sciences

Technology

Consumer Products

Digital

Financial Officers

Human Resources

Sales

Organizational Transformation

Pay Transparency

Article

Featured Topics

CEO

Kornferry6 OS

KF Content Team

TOFU

5/13/26
Insight Articles