Influencers… Losing Influence?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 16, 2024

Influencers… Losing Influence?

Social influencers’ power in business is on the wane as marketing tactics increasingly veer toward other advertising venues.

It was an easy way for firms to promote their brands or services: Grab a bunch of influencers. And finding a new source of income—if not a new career—was great for legions of those influencers.

But as a form of marketing, social influence may be quietly waning, a surprise development given how important influencers remain in other arenas. In a recent ranking of 2025 marketing-budget spends, social influencers and related events fell on the priority list from fourth and sixth place, respectively, in 2024 to eight and tenth place in 2025, displaced by niche marketing efforts like ads in digital trade journals and advertising at webinar events. “The mass appeal of influencers is no longer as impactful,” says Peri Z. Hansen, sector leader in consumer products for North America at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, data on marketing budgets varies from survey to survey, and sometimes within those surveys. But consumers’ trust in social influencers is flagging. A 2023 survey of 1,000 US consumers found that just 12% were inclined to purchase a product pushed by an influencer; meanwhile, 90% were willing to buy products recommended by other online users, or by friends and family. Many consumers are simply experiencing influencer overload. “The sheer number of influencers matters,” says Hansen. “In a sea of voices, how can customers distinguish which are just looking for a payday?”

Experts say that marketers are increasingly weary of tying their brands to human beings. While those collaborations go positively more often than not, a string of incidents involving illegal or outrageous behavior by influencers and brand ambassadors has led marketers to rethink their calculus. “From a risk perspective, when your brand is tied to an influencer, you’ve got less control,” says Renee Whalen, North America consumer market leader at Korn Ferry. If an influencer gets cancelled, products associated with them can also be cancelled—virtually overnight.

Even if the influencer behaves faultlessly, their current and past affiliations, as consumers increasingly dig into them, can cause trouble. “Savvy consumers are doing their own due diligence,” says Hansen. This can lead to suboptimal outcomes for brands in a variety of ways, such as customers discovering an influencer’s flimsy credentials or unearthing a decades-old problematic statement.

Marketers are certainly not abandoning influencers, many of whom hold firm sway over audiences in the tens of millions. Tying brands to internet-famous faces still allows firms to quickly tap into consumer spheres, and potentially grow customer bases swiftly. Yet marketers are shifting toward investments with dependably higher ROIs. For example, firms are increasingly attracted to customization, in which ads are tailored to individuals’ demographics and preferences. “Marketers are still figuring it all out—it’s early days,” says Whalen.

Experts note that one category of influencer is likely to continue receiving ad dollars: experts who educate consumers long-term on niche topics like fitness, nutrition, home care, and family life. “Influencers who are providing the tools with which consumers can shape their experiences inspire more trust,” says Hansen.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Consumer Markets capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Peri Hansen
Senior Client Partner, Sector Leader, Consumer Products, North America, Leader, Marketing Officers Practice, North America

Renee Whalen
Senior Client Partner, Market Leader

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Workforce Management

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Professional Services

Retail

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by