Essentials: The Job-Market Frenzy

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 26, 2024

Essentials: The Job-Market Frenzy

Unemployment remained low, but why did finding a job—or filling one—take an increasingly longer time in 2024?

Many workers complain of a “white-collar recession” in which firms are not filling empty roles. Add in the use of AI in hiring, and the fact that many retired workers are trying to come back to work, and you have a very complicated job market for both candidates and HR pros.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry looks at how the market shifted, and how leaders struggled to find workers with the right skills.

The New ‘Unemployables’: A Scary Future

Career and HR experts say a shocking number of well-qualified candidates in a wide range of fields are no longer finding work—and may never.

The Frenzy to Find Work

The current job market has become hugely frustrating—for candidates and companies alike. How did it get this way, and where do we go from here?

Why Finding a New Job Has Gotten a Lot Harder

For a variety of new reasons, candidates at all levels are frustrated. What can they do?

More Evidence of a ‘White-Collar Recession’

The US government’s major jobs revision confirms what many experts felt: Companies are shifting away from hiring in professional sectors.

‘Unretiring’ to Work

A new study shows retirees returning to work is no longer just a trend—it’s a permanent feature of the new world of work. How are leaders and workers reacting?

Click out all the stories in The 2024 Essentials.

Featured Insights

Essentials: Leadership, the 2024 Version
Essentials: Technology Turmoil
Essentials: A Daily Grind for Both Boss and Employee
Essentials: A Career-Ladder Conundrum
Essentials: Briefings Podcast

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by