In Search of ‘Psychological ‘Richness’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 25, 2024

In Search of ‘Psychological ‘Richness’

Some challenges are far from burdensome. They’re desirable, says best-selling author Dan Goleman.

Daniel Goleman is author of the international best-seller Emotional Intelligence and Optimal: How to Sustain Personal and Organizational Excellence Every Day. He is a regular contributor to Korn Ferry.

While happiness and meaning have long been identified as pillars of a good life, new research brings in a third pillar: psychological richness. A life that is psychologically rich involves seeking and embracing challenging, novel, and complex experiences—experiences that engage us mentally and emotionally while fundamentally shifting our perspective on the world.

The research by Shigehiro Oishi, a professor of psychology at the University of Chicago, focuses on how people experience and enjoy their lives over time.

His research shows why certain challenges and complexities aren’t burdensome, but are actually desirable. This connects with the human impulse to evolve. While changing or adapting may be seen as difficult, on some level, our evolutionary biology dictates a motivation to grow and expand.

His findings suggest why career development is so important. Ninety-three percent of employees say they will stay longer at companies that invest in their personal growth. For many people, development is not only about climbing the corporate ladder and reaching new pay brackets, but also about fundamentally connecting to a human need to engage in new experiences that stretch and shift our thinking.

In one of his studies, Oishi asked more than 2,000 American and Korean participants what they regret most in their lives. If they could go back in time and fix these things, he asked, would their lives be happier, more meaningful, or psychologically richer? Close to one-third of participants said that if they could do some things over, their lives would be psychologically richer.

Lorraine Besser, an American philosopher and professor of philosophy at Middlebury College, builds on this research in her 2024 book The Art of the Interesting, where she explores curiosity, novelty, and the value of approaching obstacles as adventures.

“The research has shown that when you have more psychologically rich experiences, it can lead you toward a more expansive sense of self,” Besser explains, “You feel more connected to everything—your environment, other people, whatever—in a non-evaluative way.”

Since purpose is ultimately about being in touch with the world around us—about transcending our own desires and viewpoints in service of something greater—the research on psychological richness bears weight in the conversation around purpose and meaning in the workplace. Because psychologically rich experiences expand our sense of self—allowing us to see beyond our own likes, dislikes, and personality structures—they can encourage us to approach overwhelming issues from a whole new vantage point.

One study has shown that focusing on psychological richness actually encourages more activism around climate change. “It can help us in the political environment too,” explains Besser. “Having a framework that’s non-evaluative means we’re not always closing off our minds to different sides. You can just engage with something (or someone) in a non-evaluative way, and it can give you a sense of deeper connection.”

If purpose is going to take root in leadership and business, it may start with each and every one of us focusing on leading a psychologically rich life. The future isn’t just about coming up with new and innovative solutions – it is about embracing novelty and seeking experiences that stretch our awareness by stimulating new thoughts, new emotions, and new ways of seeing the world.

Co-written by Elizabeth Solomon

Click here to learn more about Daniel Goleman's Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Daniel Goleman
Contributor, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

People Strategy & Performance

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by