4 Ways to Prevent Losing Your Job to AI

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 20, 2024

4 Ways to Prevent Losing Your Job to AI

As generative AI surges into the workplace, six in ten firms plan to automate roles now held by humans. Make sure yours isn’t one of them.

Worried that another surge in AI capabilities will spell the end of your career track? It’s a legitimate concern. Sixty-one percent of firms are planning to automate roles previously performed by humans in the next year, according to the CFO Survey by Duke University’s Fuqua School of Business.

Experts advise reframing the situation by turning the technology to your benefit when you can. “Think of AI as an opportunity to enhance your performance,” says organizational strategy expert Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. The idea is to deploy AI as a tool for becoming better and more efficient in your area of expertise. Long-term, the goal is to make sure that you’re in the proper position to stay in the mix of workers and AI, using these strategies:

Master AI in your current role.

Forget about being the most popular or the most respected person in the office. These days, you want to be the person everyone comes to with AI questions, including advice on prompting. This requires targeted upskilling—knowing how to proficiently use available AI tools on your team. “You’re using AI to maximize your impact at work,” says Paul Fogel, sector leader in the Software practice at Korn Ferry.

Position yourself as an AI leader.

Volunteer to be part of the team exploring the use of AI at work, and gain AI credentials wherever you can, to signal professional-level expertise. The goal is to eventually become an overseer of AI and its role within your workplace. “Imagine how helpful you can be to your employer,” says Amato.

Brand yourself. It’s hard to fire someone who’s known throughout the industry for their tack-sharp expertise. Your brand should reflect your unique skills and insights. “Make sure people know you,” says Deepali Vyas, global head of the FinTech, Payments, and Crypto practice at Korn Ferry. And if you get the axe, you’ll have an easier time finding a new role if you’re well-known in the sector.

Aim for roles centered on non-AI skills.

AI will never replace a human being’s capacity for strategizing, active listening, influencing, empathizing, and reading between the lines. That’s why jobs that involve interaction with clients, conflict resolution, and constructive feedback are safer in this economy, says Fogel.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career