5 ‘Routine’ Habits That Propel Work

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 15, 2025

5 ‘Routine’ Habits That Propel Work

Whether it’s adjusting window shades or choosing the right pen, habits can quietly have a powerful effect on performance.

Habits are the fuel of success. Whether it’s grabbing a cup of coffee before settling into a big project, decamping to the couch for deep thinking, or jogging at midday to spur fresh thoughts, these often-ignored behaviors set the stage for high performance, experts say.

But these small habits may be forgotten in favor of the goal-oriented plan of just doing the task. This is a bad idea, according to a fascinating 2020 paper in the journal Biological Psychiatry: Its authors found that habitual behaviors operate differently as they weave through sensorimotor pathways, and tend to be more automatic and dependable, even in times of stress. Goal-oriented behaviors operate through cognitive pathways in the brain’s prefrontal cortex, and are less reliable. A whopping percentage—almost half—of a person’s daily actions are mostly invisible habits done the same way every day, according to researchers from the University of Southern California. Simply put, we are creatures of habit.

The key, say experts, is to create habits that cue your work. “People who are best at achieving their goals are the ones who purposefully form habits to automate some of the things that they do,” says Benjamin Gardner, a psychologist at the University of Surrey. We spoke to our consultants to learn their tips and tricks for peak performance on the job.

Tactical Window-Shade Operations

“I’m strategic about when I open and close the window shade in my office,” says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. He explains that he maintains his shade at different levels, depending on the work at hand. “When I really need to focus, I close the shade to remove all distractions, so I’m not gazing out at birds or wondering who is walking by. But when I want to do reflective thinking, seeing blue sky and trees helps stimulate thought.”

Military-Style Pen-and-Pad Arrangement

“I have two kinds of pads and five pens on my desk, exactingly arranged as if by a high-end hotelier with a straightedge,” says David Vied, global sector leader of the Medical Devices and Diagnostics practice at Korn Ferry. “There are two yellow highlighters, one blue ballpoint, one black ballpoint, and one fountain pen. Different topics lend themselves to different speeds and structures and firmnesses of writing.”

A Perspective Shift on the Other Side of That Wall

“There’s no substitute for getting outside,” says organizational strategist Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “It really does change my perspective. Sometimes it feels like my eyeballs are physically stretching when I finally look into the horizon rather than at a screen. It’s big-picture thinking, literally.”

Pointed Questioning as Process

“In consulting, diagnosis is always the first step,” says Tom McMullen, a leader in the North America Total Rewards practice at Korn Ferry. “When a client says something that seems obvious, I’m very deliberate in replying, ‘What makes you say that?’ It drills down to the root causes.”

Loosening Up for Peak Focus

“Sometimes before a call or video presentation, I stretch out my muscles and body,” says supply-chain expert Seth Steinberg, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “Sitting in a chair can be brutal on the joints, so I stretch or do a few air squats, which relaxes me. It also makes me less fidgety on camera.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by