Essentials: A Daily Grind for Both Boss and Employee

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 26, 2024

Essentials: A Daily Grind for Both Boss and Employee

Declining trust. Earlier meetings. Ever-changing RTO policies. Even if you were successful, why did work become more of a struggle this past year?

Only about half of US workers say they’re satisfied with their jobs, according to a survey this past fall. They feel secure in their roles, but for a variety of reasons—big and small—modern work seems like more of a struggle, up and down the corporate ladder. Sometimes it’s a lack of trust among colleagues. Sometimes it’s a lack of pay increases or promotions. And sometimes it’s just meetings that start too early.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry looks at why so many people, even executives, are unhappy in their jobs, and what can be done about it.

Where Did the Trust Go?

Senior executives don’t trust the C-suite, middle managers don’t trust their bosses, and no one seems to trust entry-level workers. What’s going on, and what’s the solution?

An Epidemic of Dissatisfaction

A new survey shows that four out of five employees feel they are not thriving at work, and more than half are dissatisfied with their jobs and pay.

The Furor Over 8 AM Meetings

As some firms return to 8 AM meetings, workers yawn, then gripe—including 29 million who viewed a TikTok video protesting the practice.

The Latest Corporate Concern: Boredom

Workers have posted more than 200,000 videos about their lack of interest in their jobs. Is it a wake-up call for firm leaders?

Strangers Among Us

With employees rarely meeting their colleagues, culture needs a reboot. Why has that become so hard?

Check out all the stories in The Essentials 2024.

Featured Insights

Essentials: Leadership, the 2024 Version
Essentials: Technology Turmoil
Essentials: A Career-Ladder Conundrum
Essentials: The Job-Market Frenzy
Essentials: Briefings Podcast

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by