Benefits? What Benefits?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 22, 2024

Benefits? What Benefits?

Twenty-nine percent of executives don’t understand their own benefits packages, a problem when raises are low.

The top employee was given only a small raise for a great year. But her manager thought she’d be happy with the boost to her benefits, at least.

If only she knew what they were.

Despite strong efforts by HR departments to broadcast benefit increases, it turns out that just 29% of executives fully comprehend them, according to the 2024 US Executive Compensation and Benefits Trend Report by NFP, a property broker. For firms, this is problematic, especially in terms of employee retention, because raises have gotten smaller. “If a competitor throws a very attractive base salary at an employee, the current company may be offering more total value, but he’s not making an informed decision,” says Tom McMullen, leader of the North America Total Rewards practice at Korn Ferry.

HR professionals have long fought an uphill battle to make benefits-package information comprehensible to millions of employees. “Most people care once a year, when they get a notice that they have to re-up their benefits,” says David Vied, Korn Ferry’s global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics. “It’s complex and a nuisance.” He notes that half of the job candidates he speaks with don’t know their total compensation, including base pay and incentives. Generally speaking, he says, most employees don’t pay attention to the majority of their benefits, beyond noting that they have them.

But while workers tend to share the same benefits, as well as share information about them—such as which doctors are covered under the health plan, or whether to join a gym, or get a Peloton membership, or buy pet insurance—higher-level workers often hold contracts unique to themselves. In some cases, incentive and pay structures are complex and extend over many years.

Yet companies continue to spend an average of 29% of their compensation costs on benefits, according to Bureau of Labor and Statistics data, and employees are unlikely to realize their monetary value. One global company gave its employees, mostly knowledge workers, a quiz about their stock options, and found large knowledge gaps. “These evaluations were disasters,” says organizational strategist Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

McMullen equally faults employees, who don’t bother to read the benefits booklets presented to them, and HR staffers, for not making the information more consumable. Forty percent of companies have never documented their compensation philosophies, according to Korn Ferry data.

To avoid benefits-package ignorance, experts advise providing a two-page total rewards statement to employees annually, as well as to new employees. “It’s a lot easier to read two pages than to sift through a twenty- or thirty-page benefit-plan description,” says McMullen. At the end of the day, he follows human nature. “The subject matter is dry, and maybe not interesting for a lot of employees, including executives—but they’ll watch the TikTok version,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Professional Services

Kornferry7 TR

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by