Introducing the ‘Player-Coach’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 13, 2026

Introducing the ‘Player-Coach’

As firms cut back on managers, some are asking workers to follow the “player-coach” model once common in sports. Does it work?

‍

Curly Lambeau. Bill Russell. Pete Rose. And now… your manager?

The player-coach model, once common across professional sports, is starting to show up in an odd place: the corporate workforce. As firms, especially those in tech, eliminate managers and flatten org charts, they are tasking remaining managers or experienced colleagues with something akin to a player-coach role: They’re asking them both to manage team members and also to function as active individual contributors.

It’s a model that experts say can have its advantages, by “giving the team a ‘we’re all in this together’ feel,” says Jenna Young, a senior client partner in the Culture, Change, and Communications practice at Korn Ferry. But while it can sound great in theory, experts say it can be hard in practice. “It’s always more challenging for individuals to go down this path than it is for the firm,” says Liz Bickley, chief operating officer for Korn Ferry’s Healthcare practice.

Taking this approach, she says, can create a situation in which individuals are good at a lot of things, but great at none of them. To be sure, in US sports the player-coach model went out of style in the 80s as coaching became more analytical and complex, and athletes got bigger, stronger, faster, and more specialized. says Bickley. Another challenge of the player-coach model is that it can create friction within the team instead of fostering collaboration. For instance, player-coaches might appear to be promoting their own work or reserving resources for themselves.

Budget cutting, in conjunction with AI, is driving this trend, says Paul Dinan, a senior client partner in the Global Technology practice at Korn Ferry. At the corporate level, the practice enables firms to drive productivity with fewer people; meanwhile, the automation of administrative and other tasks frees up managers to take on more hands-on work. “The player-coach model is really a symptom of the deeper redesign of organizations through an AI-first lens,” says Dinan. “Managers are being pulled closer to the work itself, instead of just managing through layers and processes.”

History has shown that firms struggle to provide the support or training needed to help pure managers or individual contributors succeed as player-coaches. “Management tends to become an afterthought, and broader talent development gets crowded out,” says Korn Ferry senior client partner Mark Royal. He notes that the model works better with smaller, experienced teams, but gets harder to sustain as firms grow and coordination becomes more complex.

Ironically, the player-coach model is returning at a time when firms are struggling to find leaders with strong communication and people skills, as well as to redesign jobs and train employees for the AI age. Against that backdrop, experts say the trend could backfire. “It could work,” says David Napeloni, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s Global Recruitment Process Outsourcing practice, “or it could be a disaster.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jenna Young
Senior Partner and Head, Client Creative

Liz Bickley
Senior Client Partner & Chief Operating Officer, Korn Ferry Health

Paul Dinan
Senior Client Partner, Global Technology Market Advisory Leader

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

David Napeloni
Vice President, Client Services, Life Sciences

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by