Empowering Growth with Scalable, Inclusive Talent Tools

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Talent Suite|February 3, 2025

Empowering Growth with Scalable, Inclusive Talent Tools

Discover how Korn Ferry empowers organizations to address key challenges like leadership development, global collaboration, and workforce engagement.

As the workplace continues to evolve, organizations face the challenge of balancing innovation with a human-centered approach to talent management. Korn Ferry’s 2025 Talent Trends report highlights the growing need for solutions that address pressing issues such as global collaboration, leadership development, and equitable workforce engagement. Meeting these demands requires tools that go beyond adapting to change—they must empower organizations to unlock potential at scale.

This quarter, we’re excited to unveil our latest updates to the Korn Ferry Talent Suite. These advancements reaffirm our commitment to enhancing the employee experience and enabling organizations to build resilient, high-performing teams.

Thoughtfully crafted to address critical talent needs, each enhancement in this release ensures your organization has the tools it needs to thrive in 2025 and beyond. Here’s a closer look at the highlights:

Enhancing Personalization and Accessibility

We’ve introduced updates that make talent solutions more relatable and accessible to diverse teams. Dynamic Feedback now supports Portuguese, marking our first steps toward enabling global teams to engage in their preferred language, while customizable avatars make feedback experiences more approachable and allow clients to represent their culture. These changes foster stronger connections and inclusivity, helping organizations manage talent effectively across regions and cultures.

Advancing AI-Driven Innovation

Leveraging the latest in AI technology, we’ve improved decision-making and efficiency across talent solutions. From advanced AI models in Korn Ferry Pay, which enhance global applicability and precision, to flexible AI-powered job auto-matching in Profile Manager, this release continues to empower our customers to surface the jobs, skills, and benchmarks they need, when they need them, from Korn Ferry’s rich IP.

Strengthening Operations and Integration

With automation and strategic partnerships at the forefront, we’re introducing new efficiencies to your talent processes. Profile Manager integrations with both SAP SuccessFactors and Workday represent an exciting milestone in enabling customers to dynamically align talent priorities to strategic goals, hire the right talent for the right roles, and prepare to tackle the future of work head-on. Korn Ferry Architect's automation updates further save valuable time and manual work, improving accuracy in job leveling and compensation analysis.

Delivering Learning and Development at Scale

Our commitment to scalable growth is reflected in updates to Korn Ferry Learn and Coach. New courses on data analysis, including “Fundamentals of Data Analysis with AI,” bring timely skills to learners, while optimized group feedback programs in Korn Ferry Coach ensure leaders receive tailored insights to drive impactful change.

Redefining Employee Experience

The new Engaged Performance Framework™ in Korn Ferry Listen introduces a comprehensive methodology for employee experience programs. By aligning strategic insights with business outcomes, this framework positions organizations to achieve a deeper understanding of and draw powerful connections between engagement and performance. Additionally, our enhanced collaboration with Salesforce in Korn Ferry Sell delivers smarter tools for sales teams, like Sales Programs, helping teams ramp-up faster, optimize interaction, and qualify opportunities more effectively.

Korn Ferry Talent Suite

HCM software that unlocks the power of your best asset—your people

Learn more

Looking Forward Together

At Korn Ferry, we believe that transformation starts with the right tools, insights, and strategies. These latest updates to our digital solutions are designed to help you navigate the complexities of talent management while empowering your organization to unlock potential and unleash growth.

We’re excited to partner with you on this journey—let’s move forward together. Contact us today to learn more about the Korn Ferry Talent Suite.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Korn Ferry Sell

Korn Ferry Assess

Korn Ferry Pay

Success Profiles

Korn Ferry Architect

Korn Ferry Listen

Related Articles

One Talent Suite Platform: Where Talent Decisions Come Together
Talent Suite: Job Architecture and Evaluation Built for Scale
Is Sales Methodology Still Relevant in the Age of AI?
Unify Sales Teams and Build Long-Term Customer Value

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Talent Suite Resources

Korn Ferry Sell

Korn Ferry Assess

Korn Ferry Pay

Success Profiles

Korn Ferry Architect

Korn Ferry Listen