The Crucial Role of HR in Change Management

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Organizational Transformation|January 6, 2025

The Crucial Role of HR in Change Management

HR can bridge the gap between people and strategy, ensuring change is welcome and lasting. Learn five ways your HR team can drive organizational change.

Key takeaways

Why organizational change is fundamentally about people
What skills make HR professionals natural change agents
How the most successful HR teams bridge operational excellence with strategic transformation

5 Ways Your HR Team Can Drive Organizational Change

When an industrial chemical distributor failed to meet its sales goals, its leadership team knew they needed to try something new.

They realized that meeting their business objectives would require more than minor adjustments to processes. It called for a fundamental transformation in culture, leadership, and employee engagement.

Recognizing the scale of the challenge, they took an unusual step and invited the HR team to co-lead the initiative alongside the commercial team.

This collaborative approach aimed to revamp not only training and systems, but also leadership behaviors. This approach fundamentally changed how sales were conducted and how the business operated.

It was a clear example of the value of bringing HR on board at a strategic level, says Korn Ferry’s Sandra Di Vito. “You couldn’t tell who the HR professionals were versus the commercial team,” she says. “They were united, shoulder to shoulder, delivering measurable value.”

The Role of HR in Organizational Change Management

This kind of collaboration on organizational change tends to be the exception, not the rule. Many company leaders still see HR as a support function—great at recruiting or managing payroll but peripheral when it comes to driving strategic change.

This misconception overlooks HR's unique ability to bridge the gap between people and strategy.

“Organizational change, fundamentally, is about people,” says Di Vito. “We’re asking them to do things in different ways, change their behaviors, and transform their working patterns. These are all topics that are core to HR professionals and fundamental to what HR could and should be doing.”

HR teams bring high levels of empathy and a deep understanding of human psychology to the table. They comprehend how people think, act, and make decisions—crucial insights for implementing lasting change.

“When people are changing because they understand, they get the rationale. They’re incentivized to change, and they have the support to change—then those changes stick,” says Korn Ferry’s Sarah Jensen Clayton.

Here are five areas in which HR can play a transformative role in organizational change.

1. Strategic Planning

Whether it's a merger, a major restructuring, or the adoption of a new technology, HR’s role is to ensure that strategic changes are designed with employees in mind.

“The earlier HR is involved, the better they can align change with the employee experience,” says Jensen Clayton. For example, HR can identify overlapping timelines or conflicting objectives that might overwhelm employees and lead to burnout.

“It’s a little bit like air traffic control,” says Jensen Clayton. “HR can look across the change initiatives and say, ‘Maybe we should push this to the next quarter because employees in that part of the business are going to be bombarded,’ or ‘Wow, these two change initiatives are working against each other, and shouldn’t we all be moving in the same direction?’ HR can flag those types of things to leadership.”

2. Leadership Development and Support

Successful transformations hinge on effective leadership. Yet many leaders are unprepared for the demands of rapid change.

“Change-ready organizations begin with change-capable leaders,” says Jensen Clayton.

To help with that, HR can provide leadership assessments, coaching, and tailored training. This will equip leaders with the skills to support their teams through change.

For large-scale initiatives, upskilling the entire executive team can help make sure everyone’s on board with the changes and has the resources necessary to implement them.

“It’s also a good opportunity to remind leaders what their people will need from them,” she says.

3. Culture and Engagement

Corporate culture is often described as “the way we do things around here.” During a transformation, that way has to evolve.

But cultural change requires more than inspirational slogans or one-off events. It demands thoughtful architecture, explains Di Vito. “What’s the culture you’re moving toward, and how do you enable people to get there?”

HR is uniquely positioned to implement such shifts because it can ensure culture change is embedded in leadership behaviors, communication strategies, and even the systems and processes that govern daily work.

4. Communications and Messaging

Change is unsettling. It can create uncertainty among employees, who might begin to wonder what it means for them and whether they could lose their job. Poor communication amplifies fear and resistance—but thoughtful messaging that addresses employees’ concerns can foster understanding and support.

While HR doesn’t always own internal communications, it plays a critical role in framing the narrative.

Jensen Clayton suggests leveraging employee advisory committees as sounding boards to test messaging. “They can help leaders understand how the change will be felt deeper in the organization,” she says.

5. Incentives and Metrics

People do what they are rewarded for. Yet many organizations fail to align their incentive structures with the behaviors they want to see during a transformation.

HR can help craft and implement performance metrics and rewards that bolster transformation goals, giving employees and leaders the motivation to adopt new ways of working.

For example, Jensen Clayton shares the story of a pharmaceutical company that tied executive bonuses to cultural metrics like empowerment and innovation. “I’ve never seen culture change happen so fast,” she says.

HR can also leverage non-monetary rewards, such as recognition programs, career development opportunities, and visible support from senior leaders, to reinforce desired behaviors.

Organization Strategy

Change starts with people

Learn more

Unlocking HR’s Full Potential

When planning organizational change, you need HR to do more than just keep the lights on. You need HR to illuminate the path forward.

The most successful HR teams will be those that can bridge operational excellence with strategic transformation.

Organizational change isn’t just about adapting to new technologies or processes—it's about fostering a culture of agility, innovation, and continuous learning. HR must be at the forefront, empowering leaders and employees to embrace change, build resilience, and drive sustainable growth.

Ready to shift your business transformation into high gear? Read our Step-by-Step Guide to Fast-Tracking Organizational Change.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Sarah Jensen Clayton
Senior Client Partner & Global Lead, Culture, Change & Communications Practice

Sandra Di Vito

Senior Client Partner

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Organization Strategy

People Strategy & Performance

Radically Human Communications

Featured Insights

The Sprint to LA28 Games
Future-Focused and AI-Ready: Making Your Skills Strategy Work
Workforce Planning 2026: A Smart Approach to Talent Strategy
6 Ways to Build an AI-Ready Culture

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Organizational Transformation

Organization Strategy

People Strategy & Performance

Radically Human Communications

Kornferry6 OS

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by