5 Ways to Network, the Modern Way

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 17, 2024

5 Ways to Network, the Modern Way

More than eight in ten jobs are filled through workers’ networks. Building and keeping those networks, however, takes work.

Does just saying the word “networking” give you anxiety? It might conjure images of insincere people passing out business cards to strangers at an industry event, and for good reason. We’ve all been there.

Experts say that in reality, today’s “modern” networking is no longer like that. Instead, they say, networking is the important process of building true professional relationships—not collecting transactional contacts on the off chance they might help you get ahead someday.

And your professional network is extremely important. Indeed, with AI making it harder to break through when applying for job openings posted online, that network may be a lifeline for many job hunters. According to HubSpot, 85% of jobs are filled via networking. Here are some thoughts on now to build a valuable network of your own:

Think of it as making friends.

Networking is just developing relationships and exchanging information—whether it’s with someone you might already consider a professional contact, an acquaintance, or even a friend. “Fortunately, a networking conversation doesn’t mean you’re asking for a job!” says Alyson Federico, a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance. “Any conversation can be a networking conversation.”

And networking takes time. Think of it as a process of getting to know the other person, instead of a forum for pitching yourself. Get excited about who you might meet and what you might learn, and what possibilities you might discover or initiate.

Be transparent.

It’s critical advice: Don’t wait until you need a network to start building one. Initiate and nurture professional relationships while you’re in school or comfortably employed, if possible.

Networking is the most important part of the job-search process. Often, jobs are filled without being posted publicly, and you can widen the pool of jobs you have access to by letting your connections know what you’re looking for. People further along in their careers often love to help and mentor someone who’s just coming up in their industry. “Be prepared to tell your contacts how they can help you,” says Angela Galle Sylvester, a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Get advice and introductions.

When building a professional relationship, ask about your contact’s career journey and use their answer to think creatively about your own. There are many paths to success!

And be sure to ask for both advice and introductions. “Find out what they would generally recommend for you, what other companies or jobs they think you should consider, and the names of anyone else they think you should speak with,” says Sunny Levitt, a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Find the shortest path.

Don’t stop at your inner circle when building a network. Have a clear picture of the job you want and identify companies that align with your values and passions. Find your “warmest” lead at each organization and contact them via phone, email, or LinkedIn. The goal is to get in front of a human as quickly as possible.

Ask your warm lead for an informational interview from someone in the department or role that interests you, even if no job is currently open. Once they hear what you have to offer, you could get hired for a role that hasn’t even been posted! “It’s who you know that gets you in the door. It’s what you know, and how you treat people, that keeps you there,” says Michaela Buttler, a senior consultant at Korn Ferry Advance.

Take your seat at the table.

If you resist networking because you feel guilty taking up someone’s time or don’t know what to say, set a goal to talk to just one person next week about what they do. Prepare some informational-interview questions tailored to getting to know that person better and make them feel valued, not used, for their time.

Character, skills, talent, experience, and a strong personal network make up your career treasure chest. “Building a trusted career network is essential to career success, both within an organization and outside of it, so don’t apologize for wanting one,” says Val Olson, a career and leadership coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Michaela Buttler
Senior Consultant

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Alyson Federico

Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Angela Galle Sylvester

Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Sunny Levitt

Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career