The Early Careerist: Shattering the Silence

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

The Early Careerist: Shattering the Silence

In a new column, Korn Ferry Institute's resident Gen Z experts, Emily Gianunzio and Chloe Carr, confront the mental health challenges impacting today’s workforce.

Authors: Emily Gianunzio, Chloe Carr

We spend a third of our waking hours at work, so it’s no surprise that it plays a major role in our mental well-being. In fact, 60% of employees say their job has the biggest impact on their mental health. In the past, it’s been a taboo topic to talk about in the workplace, but Gen Z is not staying silent on these issues—and with good reason too.

Many workers, especially older generations, have long suffered in silence due to the stigma around discussing mental health at work. But Gen Z and millennials are pushing for change and demanding more support from employers. Growing up amid economic instability and a hustle culture that pressures us to work harder for less, it’s not surprising we’re now speaking up about these issues. As Gen Zers, we’re reshaping workplace culture and challenging the norms around mental well-being.

Stress SOS

We’re not vocal out of entitlement but from a desperate need for support. Gen Z faces unprecedented levels of stress and burnout, making effective stress management critical. Korn Ferry data shows that our well-being scores are the lowest among any working generation, compounded by challenges like pressure from social media and the demands of starting our careers.

In a recent survey, 69% of Gen Z respondents reported taking time off work due to stress or mental health issues in the past year, and we experience the highest levels of anxiety, depression, and loneliness across generations. This is not unexpected, given that we’re entering the workforce in an era of constant uncertainty and political instability. Plus, with over half of Gen Z and millennials just making ends-meet, financial worries continue to be top of mind for our generation.

The icing on the cake is our technological savviness—both our strength and Achilles heel. As an extremely online generation, we often face high levels of information overload, leading to feelings of stress, overwhelm, and anxiety as our brains try to decide what is worth our attention. On top of that, the constant ping of notifications makes it hard to switch off from work. But with the right support, companies can help us manage our mental health and flourish in our careers despite challenges beyond our control.

5 Practical Strategies for a Healthier Mind The good news is that organizations can take meaningful steps to improve the mental health of all employees. Gen Z, in particular, values genuine support over superficial policies and seeks real action from empathetic managers. Here are five actionable strategies companies can follow to break the stigma and improve mental health at work:

Offer workplace flexibility. Allowemployees to choose when, where, and how they work to reduce stress and improve work-life balance. Korn Ferry engagement data reveals that only 60% of Gen Z employees feel supported by their managers in achieving a reasonable work-life balance, compared to 69% of Baby Boomers. This suggests that while company policies on flexibility may be in place, such as allowing remote work or autonomy over schedules, managers need to improve how these policies are implemented.
Give regular feedback and recognition. Consistent feedback can boost confidence, motivation, and satisfaction, as well as help workers identify areas for development and growth. According to the American Psychological Association, 87% of employees believe recognition from their employer would help improve their mental health. Managers should go beyond annual reviews and provide regular feedback on their employees’ work to help reduce anxiety and promote growth.
Provide clear access to mental health resources. Offer and promote physical, mental, and emotional well-being services to employees. Provide access to counseling, coaching, or therapy services, share workshops or webinars on stress management or mindfulness, and create opportunities for social interaction and activities. Workplace stress affects more than just the employee dealing with it—it can point to a deeper issue, such as a culture of stress and burnout.
Create inclusive cultures that care: Create a culture of openness and respect that allows employees to share their feelings, opinions, and experiences without fear of judgment or discrimination. Gen Z wants employers to acknowledge and address the systemic and structural factors that impact mental health, such as racism, sexism, homophobia, and climate change. Research shows only 41% of Black employees believe their company has an open, inclusive work environment that doesn’t shy away from discussing mental health. When we work to break the stigma, we can create a culture that supports everyone.
Include employees in conversations and decisions. Involve employees in processes that impact their work and organization. Be clear in your communication, as different generations have varying preferences on how they receive information. This approach boosts autonomy and empowerment, sparking creativity and innovation—which is great for our mental health. When employees feel heard at work, companies get fresh ideas and perspectives, and they help their people to perform at their best.

Strength in Mental Health Support

Some people may view Gen Z's demand for support as unrealistic or entitled, but it is necessary and beneficial for everyone—and their organizations. By creating a culture of openness and compassion around mental health, companies can develop a sense of belonging, trust, and safety among their workers, improving engagement, productivity, and retention. And when we listen and respond to Gen Z's concerns, employers can gain insights that can help them adapt and thrive in a changing world.

For more information, learn more about Korn Ferry’s People Strategy capabilities.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Cultural Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by