Essentials: Briefings Podcast

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 26, 2024

Essentials: Briefings Podcast

The best of our podcasts focused on issues such as boardroom succession drama, compensation conundrums, and ageism at the office.

This past year didn’t lack leadership dilemmas to explore. Our award-winning podcast combined expert guest perspectives with some recreated scenes that brought both insights and levity to some serious subjects. Our best episodes of 2024 investigated issues such as why so many corporate training programs are mediocre, how to successfully bring on multiple new board directors, and why compensation questions remain so complex.

Training Tug of War

US firms spent nearly $102 billion on training last year, yet 7 in 10 leaders say there is a skills gap. A panel of experts explores firms' training tribulations.

Play the Board Game

Is it time for a changing of the boardroom guard? Nine in ten executives think at least one board member should be replaced. Two experts discuss how to make a timely transition.

Tell Me About Yourself – Answers!

It's the question 93% of hiring managers ask in job interviews—tell me about yourself. A top career coach shares her formula for a winning answer.

Pay-Raise Roulette

Raises are projected to dip to about 4% after a two-decade high of 4.4% just last year. A top payments expert shares what can be done to secure a precious pay bump in this economy.

Work in the Age of Ageism

Older workers say they look for ways to mitigate biases against them, but still worry about their future.

Check out all the stories in The Essentials 2024.

Featured Insights

Essentials: Leadership, the 2024 Version
Essentials: Technology Turmoil
Essentials: A Daily Grind for Both Boss and Employee
Essentials: A Career-Ladder Conundrum
Essentials: The Job-Market Frenzy

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

High Performing Executive Teams

People Strategy & Performance

Cultural Transformation

Board & CEO Services

Assessment & Succession

Succession Planning

Executive Compensation

Training & Certifications