Office Workhorses: Will They Be Needed?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 4, 2024

Office Workhorses: Will They Be Needed?

Nearly two-thirds of employees in a recent survey describe themselves as the “office workhorse.” Why that could be a problem for leaders.

Working extra hours to finish a rush project on time. Providing a new team member with advice on how to handle a situation with the boss. Pulling data to help support a presentation from a colleague on another team.

More and more people see themselves as the “office workhorse”—as someone who takes on extra work for collective, but not individual, benefit. Just over 60% of employees in a new survey describe themselves this way, saying they perform between three and six (or more) additional duties outside of their defined role. To be sure, firms have long relied on the extra efforts of a minority of high-performing individuals to create value. Think of the colleagues who always seem to volunteer to lend a hand, or the ones who perform the invisible little tasks that hold a team together.

But Dennis Baltzley, global head of leadership development solutions at Korn Ferry, says while office workhorses are indispensable, they’re also a risk. “If you lose them, the business may suffer,” he says. And according to the survey, these workers may start heading for the exits—if they aren’t already. Even if psychological theory says people benefit from helping others, more than half of office workhorses, feeling their contributions are undervalued, are burned out, while one-third are considering leaving their jobs.

Where being an office workhorse was once a badge of honor among boss-pleasing overachievers, data suggests that people aren’t volunteering for extra work so much as it is being thrust upon them. Mass layoffs—in industries like technology, consumer products, and financial services—are partly responsible for turning people into unwilling workhorses, says Kate Shattuck, managing partner at Korn Ferry. “People are working beyond max capacity,” she says. Data shows that the altruism of office workhorses is waning as well, with 53% asking for a raise to compensate for responsibilities they’ve taken on freely in the past.

Flo Falayi, a senior client partner in the Leadership and Executive Development practice at Korn Ferry, says leaders are partly to blame. From an organizational perspective, he says, reliance on a small group of “go-to people” could put the company’s success at risk. “Leaders aren’t developing or increasing the band of accountable and reliable people they can go to,” says Falayi.

Experts are quick to point out that not everyone who claims to be an office workhorse is one. Baltzley notes that people usually do a poor job of evaluating themselves. There’s even a name for this tendency: It’s called the “better-than-average effect,” and it shows that the majority of people tend to rate themselves as above average in most things. “Many of us want to be seen as central to the business, but that doesn’t necessarily mean we are,” he says.

And in the future, they may be less essential. Artificial intelligence will soon take over many administrative, logistical, and other routine tasks that managers have typically relied on office workhorses to handle, says Miriam Nelson, a senior client partner in the Assessment and Succession practice at Korn Ferry. As a result, leaders may not need to lean on them as much. Indeed, companies have been slow to hire back workers following two years of layoffs and are instead looking for other ways to boost productivity and efficiency. “There will always be people who are inclined to take on tasks left undone,” says Nelson, “but the burden of having to do so may decline over time.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Dennis R. Baltzley, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, Global Head of Leadership Development Solutions

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

Flo Falayi
Senior Client Partner, Advisory Practice

Miriam Nelson, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, Assessment and Succession

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Leadership & Professional Assessments

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by