The New Hybrid Hierarchy

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|January 2, 2025

The New Hybrid Hierarchy

In a bid to get highly skilled workers, talent-acquisition pros expect to let some staffers work remotely more often than others.

This is one of Korn Ferry's Under the Radar trends for 2025. You can read about all these trends here.

The entire department had long shared the same in-office expectation: four days per week. Then executives, who wanted the best of the best, hired a new project leader based in the next state over. The new person was only expected to appear in-office every two weeks. His coworkers were miffed.

If you work at a firm that wants people back in the office, the only leeway you’re likely to be seeing has been the kind quietly left up to your manager’s discretion. But in 2025, the favoritism, as such, is expected to be broader and more formal, with companies making flexibility part of what they offer to attract key candidates. The timing makes sense: Working from home is a perk that is becoming precious for many, since 8 in 10 CEOs say they want a full return to office. But it’s one likely to be controversial. “The risk is the inequality of it all,” says HR expert Ron Porter, senior partner at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, the gap between in-office and at-home workers came to light during the pandemic, and largely (but not always) separated white-collar from blue-collar employees. But 2025’s Haves and Have-Nots will be divided not by economics, but by talent and how much the company wants them, experts say. In a tight labor market, hiring managers are increasingly leaning on flexible work arrangements to attract and retain top candidates. The inequity mirrors another split: highly compensated incoming employees versus longtime, lower-compensated employees.

Companies have historically—and typically confidentially—allowed unique hybrid arrangements only to top brass. “For the most part, the arrangements of people at senior levels aren’t very clear to most people,” says Porter. But companies say the skills they need are in short supply, and that those who have them want flexibility along with better pay. “We see it in data,” says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “Candidates are placing priority on flexible work arrangements when it comes to choosing, staying, or potentially leaving.”

Experts note that while some workers won’t care about the in-house gap, others may be incensed. “That’s invariably going to create some sensitivities,” says Royal. To avoid that kind of blowback, experts advise that firms maintain a consistent and explainable rationale—and that managers be transparent about it. For example, if a new coworker joins the team, the rationale for the different arrangement should be clearly stated. The worst thing a manager can do is say “‘That’s not your business,’” says Porter. “That doesn’t solve the problem, and probably exacerbates the issue.”

For more information, see Korn Ferry's Talent Acquisition Trends 2025 report.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ronald Porter
Senior Partner

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Year of the Stealth Payroll Cut
Boards in Survival Mode
Equity Compensation: Not Just for Executives
The Fight Over AI Is Just Beginning

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Tech Talent

AI in the Workplace