M&A, Poised to Return

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 20, 2024

M&A, Poised to Return

Sitting on a record $3.8 trillion in cash, firms that were waiting for the US elections are poised for record dealmaking. Will that mean more layoffs, or more hiring?

You weren’t the only one waiting for all that campaigning to end.

After a noticeable and unexpected slowdown in merger and acquisition activity in the US this year, experts are predicting that the coming months will see corporate leaders jump into a slew of big deals. Certainly, the money is there: S&P 500 firms have been holding a record $3.8 trillion cash while awaiting the result of the US presidential election. “M&A thrives on certainty over ambiguity,” says Jeff Constable, co-leader of the Global Financial Officers practice at Korn Ferry.

Not knowing who would occupy the White House, many corporate leaders were concerned about where antitrust and regulatory oversight might be headed. Now, Constable says, a less restrictive environment under the incoming administration could see the return of transformational deals.

Experts say some industries are poised for more consolidation than others. Technology, energy, and life sciences are among the sectors experiencing the most activity this year. Nicson White, a senior client partner in the Life Sciences Advisory practice at Korn Ferry, says that supply-chain disruption, economies of scale, and the need for new drug therapies are driving consolidation in the sector; deal volume is up 20% in the last 12 months. “AI is accelerating drug-discovery research and clinical processes, allowing wider participation and more potential acquirees to enter the market,” says White.

Still, dealmaking isn’t necessarily the best move for some firms, as wrongheaded deals have historically reduced value for shareholders. Many lead to layoffs of key staff members that firms regret, instead of increased hiring and more innovation. Experts say leaders need to be disciplined—because firms often overpay to outbid competitors, or rush to buy a company that isn’t a great strategic fit just because they have the money to do so. “Some firms are always prone to overpaying for acquisitions,” says Constable.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jeff Constable
Office Managing Partner, Senior Client Partner, Co-Leader Global Financial Officers Practice

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

FinTech

Financial Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by