5 Ways to Win the Holidays at Work

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 3, 2024

5 Ways to Win the Holidays at Work

The end-of-year sprint is back. Here’s how to avoid the fate of the nearly half of workers who logged hours over the holidays last year.

Last year, 10% of non-retail workers ended up working on Christmas day, and 44% logged hours over the holidays, according to data from CalendarLabs. Many had to work the holiday because they had heavy workloads or couldn’t schedule around their coworkers. Don’t expect less work in 2024. After two relatively quiet years, most companies expect a return to the hectic period that usually occurs right before the end-of-year holidays. Expect managers to be asking you to do as much as possible.

To improve your chances of having a relaxing few days off at the end of the year—and of looking good in front of the boss—experts recommend taking a few steps.

Expect several crazy weeks.

Experts say that the end-of-year sprint is back in 2024. Plan for a very busy December, with phones and emails dinging right up until Christmas Eve. “This year, no one’s taking their foot off the gas between Thanksgiving and New Year's,” says supply-chain expert Seth Steinberg, a Korn Ferry senior client partner.

Don’t get blindsided by your boss.

Communicate your vacation plans now and ask your manager about deadlines and expectations. “Set boundaries early,” says Deepali Vyas, head of Korn Ferry’s Fintech, Payments, and Crypto practice. That means sharing your time-off plans as soon as you know them, and formally requesting PTO as needed. That way, if coworker conflicts arise, there’s plenty of time to explore work-arounds.

Prioritize key goals.

Review your objectives and deadlines now and get ahead of them. This will keep you on track when holiday commitments pile up alongside your work. “You’ll prevent the end-of-year rush,” says Vyas.

Make time for a little exercise.

December is not the month to make great athletic strides; simply staying active is plenty. “A little bit is better than nothing,” says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics at Korn Ferry. He's an avid runner who aims for 50% to 75% of his usual exercise in December. That might be simply a walk around the block and hydrating, he says, to avoid tipping into poor sleep.

Know that you can’t do it all.

Especially if your company’s fiscal year ends on December 31st. “No one ever really pulls off moderation,” says Vied. When work performance or family holiday pressures land, they must be met. Moderate imbalance is just about right.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career