Essentials: A Career-Ladder Conundrum

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 26, 2024

Essentials: A Career-Ladder Conundrum

The conventional ways to move forward—raises and promotions—took a hit in 2024 as companies cut back on both. Employees at all levels had to get creative.

This was the year companies dialed back on raises and promotions. Experts say that anyone who wants to get ahead will need not only to achieve solid performance, but also to be creative about when, how, and where they look for opportunities.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry distills some of the best career insights our experts shared in 2024.

5 Ways to Be Sure Your Boss Sees Your Good Work

There’s an art to subtly letting it be known that you’re the best employee ever. And it may be needed in this job market.

5 Ways to Ask for a Raise in a Performance Review

Many experts say it’s an ideal time to raise the issue. Just don’t mention inflation.

5 Résumé Tips for People Over 50

Layoffs, inflation, and the high cost of living are causing more older workers to look for jobs. Here are five ways to craft an age-friendly résumé.

5 Tips for More Effective Job Searches

New tech has made applying for a job easier—but much harder to land it. Our experts share tips on how to make the most of your job search.

6 Grueling Job-Interview Questions to Get Through

Recruiters are creating new quandaries for candidates as well as using some old standbys more frequently. How to prepare for them.

Click out all the stories in The 2024 Essentials.

Featured Insights

Essentials: Leadership, the 2024 Version
Essentials: A Daily Grind for Both Boss and Employee
Essentials: Technology Turmoil
Essentials: The Job-Market Frenzy
Essentials: Briefings Podcast

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Career Advice

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by