Britain’s Growing Phone-Call Phobia

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 3, 2024

Britain’s Growing Phone-Call Phobia

Nearly 70% of UK millennials and Gen Zers would rather text than talk on the phone.

The call, it seems, isn’t being answered—not if it’s on a younger worker's phone, at least.

In a trend that has become firmly global, a recent survey showed that fewer than one in four UK residents in the 18-to-34 age bracket ever pick up a voice or audio call—particularly if they don’t recognize or aren’t expecting it. Up to 70% of the cohort prefer texting to a phone call, the same report states. “For this generation, to text is the same as speaking to someone,” says Sonamara Jeffreys, Korn Ferry’s president for EMEA.

That, of course, isn’t the case for older generations, which raises concerns that a generation gap in communications could lead to, well, miscommunication on important matters. Even as new ways of connecting are emerging, some issues are too, Jeffreys says, communication skills being one of them. A basic example: Not everyone understands that ending a phone or Zoom call politely can help build working relationships with colleagues or customers. “These skills aren’t where they should be,” she says.

The change is understandable. Gen Z were “the first digital natives,” according to a separate report. Never having used landlines, they’ve embraced smartphones and new ways of doing things, says Emma Burgess, vice president for client resources for Korn Ferry’s Recruitment Process Outsourcing practice in EMEA. “Gen Z are the ones that are transforming the workplace,” she observes.

This embrace of new technology has also created unspoken new rules. When a group of recent graduates was asked why they won’t answer calls they’re not expecting, they said the number-one reason was safety, in particular from cyber scammers looking to capture voiceprints to steal cash. The second reason they cited was to avoid interruptions. The third was to control communication.

Gen Z isn’t the whole story. The COVID-19 pandemic also greatly influenced how the rest of us communicate, says Tim Manasseh, Korn Ferry’s senior partner, EMEA, for global consumer products. Post-COVID, workers got used to videoconferencing apps like Teams and Zoom, which require people to schedule a time to meet. On top of that, workers at the office now spend more time sending emails and using WhatsApp to connect with colleagues and friends, he says. “It wasn’t just a gradual shift,” he says. “We’ve all had to move at the same pace.”

Manasseh points to other challenges for videoconferences, such as people who won’t turn on their cameras. Bandwidth issues are frequent. Some people sign off abruptly; others pay more attention to their phones than to the meeting. Small talk and social graces haven’t yet evolved for these new mediums, he says. “Is quitting the meeting without saying goodbye the right way to leave?”

It's not like no one has noticed the emergence of these communication issues. One of Britain’s top schools, Eton College, recently banned smartphones, affirming that the technology was impairing students’ ability to learn how to communicate. Phones with text and/or voice functions are permitted, however.

Gen-Z employees in the UK seem to understand they lack phone skills for the workplace, particularly when dealing with customers, Burgess says. They recognize the need for training, and they want to be trained. The good news: Some savvy executives at large customer-care units are training their staff to use the phone to communicate. “It is only in their personal lives that Gen Z doesn’t want to use direct communications,” she says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Workforce Management capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

No items found.

Sonamara Jeffreys

President, Korn Ferry, EMEA

Emma Burgess

VP, Client Solutions, RPO EMEA

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Talent Acquisition