Was Inflation Just ‘Resting’?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 13, 2024

Was Inflation Just ‘Resting’?

After declining for more than a year, inflation edged up, following a historic pattern. How should leaders react?

It appeared to have gone away, giving corporate leaders a chance to anticipate a bold return to a new normal. And a series of rate cuts by the Feds only encouraged the belief that the ugly shadow of inflation was fading.

But according to some prognosticators, as well as a new government report this week, the high inflation of 2022 and 2023 may not have been defeated; it may only be “resting.” Based on historical patterns—as well as economists’ views of the stated priorities of the next US administration—worries that inflation could return are slowly emerging. Should those worries prove well-grounded, “CEOs are undoubtedly going to face very difficult choices,” says Mark Arian, CEO of Korn Ferry’s Consulting business.

No one can predict the future, of course. But based on US data released this week, prices rose higher than expected for three straight months. Inflation is now running at a 3.6% annualized rate, the fastest pace since April.

Multiple bouts of high inflation within a relatively short time frame aren’t unprecedented. In the United States, this last occurred when inflation spiked in the 1960s, dropped to 3% in 1971, then jumped to 10% in 1974. Today, experts say, a double spike in inflation might look different. Inflation began climbing just as companies were catching up to a labor shortage and COVID-related supply-and-demand disruptions. In 2022, average prices rose by 8% in the United States, and by far more in many other countries. Companies were frequently able to pass along their higher costs to consumers. Until recently, inflation had been trending down for about a year.

For leaders, a major concern about inflation is its effect on payrolls, since salary and benefits represent the bulk of costs at most companies. Experts suggest dusting off the playbook they might have used two years ago, when inflation last spiked. “The principles still hold up,” says Tom McMullen, leader of Korn Ferry’s North America Total Rewards business.

If an organization feels compelled to increase pay during a period of high inflation, McMullen recommends considering a variable-pay program instead of permanent base-salary increases. There are plenty of options, he says, including retention bonuses, special onetime payouts, and referral bonuses.

Inflation also should focus leaders on cutting costs, especially if growth continues to be sluggish, as it has been for many organizations. “I think CEOs who may be reluctant to downsize should strongly consider doing this, in order to maintain margin,” Arian says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

FinTech

Financial Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by