An Epidemic of Dissatisfaction

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 21, 2024

An Epidemic of Dissatisfaction

A new survey shows that four out of five employees feel they are not thriving at work, and more than half are dissatisfied with their jobs and pay.

It’s not much of a secret to corporate leaders that a growing number of workers are expressing unhappiness with their jobs. After all, it was only a couple of years ago that “quiet quitting” and the Great Resignation were making headlines.

But a recent survey of employee drive suggests an even darker picture. Instead of saying that they’re growing, developing, and getting ahead, a shocking majority of employees feel that they are basically just hanging on. Four out of five employees in a new global workplace well-being survey say they are not thriving at work. More than half of those surveyed say they are struggling with stress, aren’t happy with their jobs, and don’t feel their work has purpose. The prevalence of these sentiments among employees is concerning, says Mark Royal, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in employee engagement. “It is getting worse instead of better,” he says.

Employees feel that they aren’t getting ahead for several reasons, but one of the biggest is pay. To be sure, a separate survey by LinkedIn on workforce confidence found that 56% of US professionals are dissatisfied with the money they make. Not coincidentally, that figure aligns with the 57% of employees who say they are dissatisfied with their jobs overall. Dennis Deans, vice president of global human resources at Korn Ferry, says there is still a disconnect between what companies are willing to pay and what employees expect.

“Salaries are down from their peak levels, and people are struggling with that,” he says. In the tech industry, says Paul Fogel, professional search sector leader for software at Korn Ferry, jobs that were paying $275,000 two years ago are now offering $210,000. “That factors into the feeling of not thriving,” says Fogel. The problem for leaders is that feelings often turn into behavior, like low productivity and high turnover. Korn Ferry’s Workforce 2024 report found that “generous compensation” is the top reason talent stays with a company—and low compensation is the top reason it doesn’t.

Leaders can take a number of measures to help employees feel they’re thriving, say experts. A flexible work policy is at the top of that list: In Korn Ferry’s report, professionals cited it as their top consideration when job hunting; in LinkedIn’s survey, remote and hybrid workers were happier and more satisfied with their jobs. Other non-financial rewards that have been shown to increase satisfaction and engagement include employee experiences such as strong recognition programs and education and development opportunities.

Though it may seem counterintuitive, more transparency around pay practices and decisions will lead to more satisfaction among employees, says Tom McMullen, a leader in the North America Total Rewards expertise group at Korn Ferry. “More transparency generally leads to higher levels of trust, because workers feel they are being treated fairly,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Professional Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by