Essentials: Leadership, the 2024 Version

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 26, 2024

Essentials: Leadership, the 2024 Version

Every year is different for those at the top. We looked at how leaders grappled with change in a tough year.

CEOs got more optimistic about their firms' prospects as 2024 moved along. By year’s end, they weren’t giddy, but inflation subsided and interest rates fell, so at least the cost side of their business gave them reason to be optimistic.

Managing people, however, seems increasingly challenging. Middle managers are being asked to do more than ever before. Gen-Z employees don’t want to take on management roles. Plus, leaders have to navigate an era in which pay—for both their employees and themselves—is no longer rising particularly quickly. These stressors sometimes derailed even normally good bosses.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry examines 2024’s toughest leadership challenges and how some of the world’s most successful companies overcame them.

The World's Most Admired Companies: How They Stack Up

The 2024 edition of Korn Ferry and Fortune’s most respected organizations is out, with executives valuing stability most of all.

CEO: I’m an Imposter

More than seven in 10 top bosses tell Korn Ferry they sometimes feel they’re not equipped to handle the job. Why?

The Silent Treatment—Between Gen Zers and Boomers

Forty percent of workers over 55 haven’t spoken to a Gen Zer at work in a year, and one in five Gen Zers to someone over 50. Why corporate leaders should be worried.

Just Pay Me

Flexibility. Security. A firm’s values. These matter to workers, but a groundbreaking Korn Ferry survey finds compensation continues to play a paramount role.

Bad Bosses: 5 Telltale Signs

In most cases, managers can make or break a career. How to know if your boss is merely frustrating, or truly bad.

Check out all the stories in The Essentials 2024.

Featured Insights

Essentials: Technology Turmoil
Essentials: A Daily Grind for Both Boss and Employee
Essentials: A Career-Ladder Conundrum
Essentials: The Job-Market Frenzy
Essentials: Briefings Podcast

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Organization Strategy

People Strategy & Performance

Cultural Transformation

Change Management

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Succession Planning

Coaching

Nimble

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by