Spy on Me—Just Not at Work

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|December 10, 2024

Spy on Me—Just Not at Work

Year-end data “wraps” by consumer firms show people are tracked much more than they realize. But if it’s not at work, do they care?

When it comes to surveillance, the longstanding conflict about data—what information consumers are willing to give up, and what companies do with it—is eroding so fast, it may be vanishing.

This week, a host of streaming companies, retailers, and even dating and language apps went viral on social media with year-in-review wraps of users’ behavior on their platforms. These companies now openly admit they are tracking how many lattes we have, what our favorite Taylor Swift song is, even how long we doomscroll on our smartphones.

All of this is astonishing, given how recently consumers were still objecting to firms collecting data. But Peri Hansen, sector leader of the Consumer Products practice and leader of the Marketing Officers practice in North America for Korn Ferry, says it’s all part of a “broader social acceptance” of data collection. “The degree to which people will give up control of their data keeps moving further out,” says Hansen.

Indeed, experts say consumers, who first resisted giving up their personal information, then accepted it as a necessary part of the digital age, now openly embrace companies’ harvesting of it. That’s happening in part because organizations, especially those in the consumer-products sector, have gotten very good at customizing, personalizing, and packaging data in a way users find meaningful, says Bryan Ackermann, head of AI strategy and transformation at Korn Ferry. “People are making a value judgment on how much they are getting from the personalization versus how much data they are giving up for that personalization,” he observes.

To be sure, many people often overlook—or are distracted from—just how much of their data is being collected and how it is being used, says Paul Fogel, professional search sector leader for software at Korn Ferry. “The customization is something consumers love, until they realize how much of their data has been harvested.” For instance, he notes, there has been backlash against companies that have trained AI models, tracked location, or sold personal data.

Still, for all the change on the consumer side, surveillance in the workplace remains a touchy subject. That’s partly because trust between employees and employers is at an all-time low. Surveys show that one-fourth of US professionals don’t believe their employer trusts them, for instance. Ironically, the mistrust is growing in part because remote work has prompted firms to track employees more than ever: 71% of employees are now subject to some form of corporate surveillance. “People make a distinction between surveillance by an outside company versus their own employer,” says Ackermann, “and that impacts what data they are willing to give up.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Peri Hansen
Senior Client Partner, Sector Leader, Consumer Products, North America, Leader, Marketing Officers Practice, North America

Bryan Ackermann
Senior Vice President, Head of AI Strategy & Transformation

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

High Performing Executive Teams

Leadership Development

Talent Acquisition

Professional Search

Organization Strategy

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by