5 Ways to Look Current on LinkedIn

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|November 6, 2024

5 Ways to Look Current on LinkedIn

With the job market slowing, job seekers may need to take some key steps to boost their personal brands online.

The job market took a serious hit this fall, with only 12,000 new jobs added in October—the lowest monthly number since 2020. And while many jobs are still available, experts say the latest news may be a wake-up call for job hunters to take a hard look at their “brand” on social media. Staying active, they say, is key. “If you want to get noticed, you’ll need to build a strong personal brand online that demonstrates a proven track record in your area of expertise,” says Korn Ferry Advance career coach David Meintrup.

While there’s no surefire formula for getting more attention online, experts say posting frequently, tweaking your profile often, and searching for jobs can get you noticed.

Post the right type of photo (and video).

Your profile photo is often a recruiter’s first impression of you, so make sure the image you choose is centered on your face and that your expression is professional, or at least professional looking.

But there are other visual improvements you can make. A standard LinkedIn profile comes with a blue banner that stretches across the top of the page; it’s one of the first things a network contact or recruiter sees when they get to your profile. An eye-catching image or a brief description of your career could make your page considerably more appealing.

Plus, many experts now suggest making a brief (30 seconds or so) video of yourself. Use this to show off your personality—again, in a professional way—and highlight what drives you career-wise. The more compelling content you can put out there, the better.

Highlight your headline.

Let’s say you’re a managing director, and you describe yourself as one on LinkedIn. Now search “managing director” on the site, and you’ll see how easily your profile can get lost amid thousands of other people using the same job title.

Instead of just listing your job title, experts suggest treating it more descriptively. A descriptive, strategic profile headline can grab a recruiter’s attention. You have 220 characters to separate yourself from the pack.

Optimize for keywords.

Make sure your profile features keywords that a recruiter might have in mind for a particular job, as well as terms that are regularly used in your industry. Read through multiple descriptions of the type of position you’re seeking, keeping an eye out for the most commonly used keywords, and incorporate those words into your own profile. Link your profile to other sites, whether it’s bylined articles, your own website, or your social-media channels.

Post about relevant topics.

Been to a work-related conference recently? Share your thoughts. Has your industry been in the news recently? Write about it. You can also comment on your own posts. Experts say the LinkedIn algorithm prioritizes content that sparks conversations and interactions among users.

Give and get more recommendations.

Experts say that adding relevant recommendations has a multipronged impact on how your profile shows up in job searches. Profiles with three or more recommendations will show up in a recruiter’s initial LinkedIn search. At the same time, recruiters want to see that a potential job candidate also gives out recommendations to people he or she has worked with. “It’s an early sign that this person might be a good teammate and take the time to recognize others,” says Angela Galle Sylvester, a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance

Remodel over time, not all at once.

You might be tempted to take a couple of hours and complete these steps in one sitting. That’s fine—an upgraded page still beats a stale one. But career coaches say that tweaking your profile can actually move you up search rankings. When you decide to start a serious job search, space out your upgrades by a day or two.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s career development capabilities from Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

David Meintrup
Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Angela Galle Sylvester

Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career