A New Budget Crisis: Healthcare Costs

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 30, 2024

A New Budget Crisis: Healthcare Costs

Facing increases of 7% to 10%, companies are looking for ways to share costs. Can employees handle higher premiums?

Healthcare costs are rising. Again. Yes, they rise every year. Between 2013 and 2020, health-benefit costs per employee jumped between 2% and 4% annually, according to figures from Mercer. But that, it turns out, was a pittance.

This year, things are getting messy. Firms will likely face an increase in healthcare costs of 7.7% in 2025, up from 6.5% in 2023 and 6.9% in 2024, according to a new survey. Nearly half of employers expect to exceed their 2024 healthcare budgets. To be safe, experts are budgeting for leaps of 7% to 10% in 2025. The question, of course, is how will firms absorb these new costs. They have four choices, says Ron Seifert, leader of the North America Workforce Reward and Benefits practice at Korn Ferry: They can pay it, pass it on, share it, or redesign plans. “Clearly, firms are struggling with this,” he says.

To be sure, a good number will pass these expenses along, either partially or fully, as higher premiums or adjustments that create more out-of-pocket costs. But that could backfire, experts say, in a workforce that has grown less productive and less engaged due to return-to-office policies and smaller salaries. “Unfortunately, organizations do not realize that they can start with strategies much less disruptive to employees,” says Steve Kapper, head of the National Health and Welfare Benefits practice at Korn Ferry.

These include reviewing self-funding options and negotiating better vendor contracts (with pharmacy benefit managers, for instance), as well as implementing care that manages members' underlying health conditions.

Healthcare costs are rising largely because people are returning to their typical volumes of healthcare utilization following years of pandemic disruptions, says Seifert. They are no longer deferring procedures like knee and hip replacements, and they’re seeking screenings like colonoscopies and mammograms, as well as pricier treatments, like designer weight-loss medications. Forecasting these costs is complicated by the ongoing collective-bargaining negotiations at many firms, which complicate the math by significantly shifting the details of compensation and benefits.

This month, finance departments can be found devising strategies to absorb cost jumps, such as limiting total compensation-package costs per employee. But experts say that many firms are likely to land on a mix of sharing costs with employees and redesigning plans to lower costs. Seifert says a common maneuver is to remove clinicians from a more costly provider in a region; if their doctors aren’t in the same network, employees tend not to mind. Other firms may shift toward more proactive healthcare, such as front-end screenings.

For firms sharing the cost increases, premium costs typically rise for both employees and employers. For example, if employees typically pay 20% of premium costs, they will continue to pay 20%. The messaging around this strategy, says Seifert, is “we both take the pain.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

Steve Kapper
Associate Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Professional Services

Kornferry7 TR

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by