Our Gifts of Grace

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|December 16, 2024

Our Gifts of Grace

Even when clouds thicken, it’s the leader’s job to find an opening to inspire others, says Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

Head south. At the light, turn left. In a quarter mile, turn right….

Detoured from a snarl of traffic, I kept hearing that voice—leading me away from the familiar. It happened just a few weeks ago. The clock was nearing midnight, and I was trying to get home. But that voice urged—a turn, another, and yet another….

I had no idea where I was or where I was going. But then suddenly, something looked eerily familiar.

Pulling to the curb, I couldn’t believe my eyes. There was that elementary school— where I had spent the earliest years of my life.

As I stared at that low, darkened building all the memories started flooding back, projecting scenes from a childhood many moons ago. The tall fence that ringed the playground. That kindergarten room where I spread a blanket on the cold tiled floor for naps.

Two streets down and three blocks over, the small apartment where we’d lived so long ago. The alley where my dad taught me how to ride a bike, his firm hand on my shoulder. The front steps where I slipped and fell, cutting my arm and needing stitches. That tiny Christmas tree….

The bitter and the sweet.

At this time of year, nostalgia so often puts a golden glow on the past. But we all know that not every day is butterflies and rainbows. Our memories are probably a mixture. And that’s life.

It’s also the reality we face as leaders. Even when clouds thicken, it’s our job to search for that small opening and inspire others to find the blue sky above.

And that starts with Grace.

Gratitude: Two small but extremely powerful words that translate into every language: thank you.

Resilience: It’s not the moment of failure that counts, it’s what you do after that matters most.

Aspiration: The knowledge that we can make tomorrow different and better than today.

Courage: This is not “no fear,” but rather to “know fear” and move beyond it.

Empathy: Walking in each other’s shoes and journeying together.

Grace is a feeling, an action, a perspective, a virtue that rises above the rest. Unearned and unmerited, grace is the gift of goodwill.

As the holiday season is upon us, whatever we celebrate, however we celebrate, let us remember why we celebrate. When we connect with others, we spark hope, we find comfort, we kindle joy. Indeed, that’s when we find our gifts of Grace.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by