The Leadership Election ‘Excuse’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 30, 2024

The Leadership Election ‘Excuse’

US election uncertainty has been the reason many leaders have punted on big decisions. So now what?

It’s why tech firms have held back on some hiring. It’s why supply-chain leaders have waited to commit to new partners. And according to a survey by the Federal Reserve, the uncertainty around the US elections is why nearly one-third of financial decision-makers have postponed, scaled back, delayed, or canceled their firm’s investing plans.

But now that the election is decided that excuse may no longer apply. Indeed, experts say leaders will soon be unable to cite the presidential elections as a reason to delay decision-making. It’s about time, they add. “The election has been a big distraction,” says JP Sniffen, practice leader for Korn Ferry’s Military Center of Expertise.

While stakeholders have been willing to accommodate delays thus far, their patience could wear thin. “If you just keep waiting for outcomes for other people’s decisions, you’ll never get on with your own agenda,” says Anthony Goodman, a senior client partner and head of Korn Ferry’s Board Effectiveness practice.

In some industries, the election’s outcome (or its general drift) will allow leaders to activate a plan they’ve been sitting on. For instance, some energy- or industrial-focused companies will have crucial data points for a decision about whether or not to maintain major investments in climate-change-related technologies—investments which had significant support from the current US administration, but may not in a future one. “For a lot of industries, there have been two strategies, and one will get the green light,” says Cheryl D’Cruz-Young, founding member of Korn Ferry’s Sustainability and ESG Center of Expertise.

For others, the election results will end a self-imposed investment freeze. Barry Toren, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s North American Financial Officer practice, says many of his clients have been sitting on cash. “The floodgates will open. Once the election is done, the spending will start,” he says.

To be sure, experts say there won’t be a rush to announce decisions the moment the polls close, or even in the first few days afterward. Indeed, some analysts are predicting that court battles over the results may stretch on for weeks. Besides, even if certainty around a US policy is very important, plenty of uncertainty will remain for leaders to contend with—stagnant major economies across the world, two major wars, the development of artificial intelligence, and climate change, to name a few. “That brew will still be out there for quite some time,” Goodman says.

To some degree, it’s been understandable that leaders have held back on major decisions pending the election results and their policy implications. “For some leaders, there’s a potentially big cost for moving quickly and being wrong,” says Korn Ferry vice chairman Nels Olson.

Still, leaders who have been waiting to make major decisions may have missed out on multiple opportunities. Over the past year, the US economy’s bout of major inflation ended, and the economy grew steadily. Indeed, in the Federal Reserve survey, the leaders who reported delaying investments admitted that their firms will have lower revenue and employment growth in 2024 than firms whose plans aren’t impacted by the election.

The decision-making delays have also made reaching targets potentially more difficult for some organizations. Even as higher-level managers hesitated, lower-level managers and individual contributors had keep the business moving, often without support. “A lot of managers want to know how they are going to hit their goals,” Sniffen says.

Besides executing their major post-election capital and strategic decisions, many leaders should come up with plans to bring in more skilled talent and convince more individual contributors to become managers. Neither of those problems, which can be found in any industry these days, are likely to be solved by a new US president.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership Consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

JP Sniffen
Practice Leader, Military COE & Physical Security

Anthony Goodman
Senior Client Partner, Head of the Board Effectiveness Practice

Cheryl D’Cruz-Young
Senior Client Partner, Sustainability & Global Energy

Nels Olson
Vice Chairman and Co-Leader, Board & CEO Services and Global Leader, Government Affairs

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

High Performing Executive Teams

Board & CEO Services

Leadership Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by