Using Korn Ferry’s Talent Suite to Navigate Key Trends in 2025

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Talent Suite|November 12, 2024

Using Korn Ferry’s Talent Suite to Navigate Key Trends in 2025

Korn Ferry's Talent Suite's R2 product release can help you to navigate talent challenges for 2025 with updated insights and research-backed learning.

The evolving world of work is setting new expectations for both employers and employees. Korn Ferry’s recent 2025 Talent Trends report highlights how organizations are rethinking strategies for skill acquisition, employee engagement, and leadership resilience in response to shifting market demands and workforce preferences. As talent challenges become more nuanced and interconnected, companies need more than isolated solutions—they need an integrated, future-ready approach to talent management.

To support organizations in navigating these challenges, we’re excited to introduce the Korn Ferry Talent Suite, our path towards a unified platform that brings together our most powerful talent solutions. This quarter's launch not only represents a significant milestone for Korn Ferry, but also underscores our commitment to driving innovation and delivering even more value to our clients.

The Korn Ferry Talent Suite combines cutting-edge assessments, personalized development, AI-driven insights, and comprehensive solutions to help leaders build adaptable, high-performing teams. From identifying future leaders to closing skill gaps and fostering continuous growth, Talent Suite is designed to empower organizations to unlock potential and unleash growth.

Empowering Organizations with Integrated Talent Solutions

While the announcement of our Talent Suite is the primary focus for delivering unified talent solutions, we're equally focused on continuing to refine each of its core products. Our R2 release delivers a range of enhancements designed to keep you at the forefront of talent innovation.

Korn Ferry Assess & Learn: Expanding Dynamic Feedback across Korn Ferry Select and Assess delivers real-time, personalized insights to accelerate growth. With AI-enhanced content recommendations, Korn Ferry Learn now connects learning paths directly to assessment results, driving more targeted development opportunities.

Korn Ferry Sell: Sales Performance Insights brings crucial adoption and impact metrics to the forefront, helping sales leaders gauge effectiveness. Our collaboration with Salesforce also brings new AI-driven capabilities to boost productivity, foster collaboration, and connect solution adoption with tangible business outcomes.

Korn Ferry Pay: We’re streamlining access to vital compensation data. Enhanced integration with HRIS systems now automates data submissions and provides instant insights, ensuring you have the information you need, when you need it.

Profile Manager: In an increasingly global environment, flexibility matters. New AI-powered Success Profiles make it easier to align talent strategies across regions and cultures, fostering a more unified approach to talent management.

Korn Ferry Coach: Launched on November 1, the People Leader Development Program blends research-backed learning with scalable group sessions to drive leadership growth. Enhanced AI Chat capabilities now deliver more precise, tailored responses, helping users extract meaningful insights from their assessment results.

‍

Korn Ferry Talent Suite

HCM software that unlocks the power of your best asset—your people

Learn more

Looking Forward Together

As we continue to innovate and refine our solutions, we remain dedicated to helping you turn potential into performance. The Korn Ferry Talent Suite represents our belief that when organizations have the right tools and insights, they can create a thriving, resilient workforce. We’re excited to see how our new offerings will support you in reaching your goals this quarter and beyond.

For a deeper dive into our R2 updates or to learn more about Talent Suite, please contact us today.

‍

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Korn Ferry Sell

Talent Suite

Korn Ferry Assess

Korn Ferry Pay

Success Profiles

Related Articles

One Talent Suite Platform: Where Talent Decisions Come Together
Talent Suite: Job Architecture and Evaluation Built for Scale
Is Sales Methodology Still Relevant in the Age of AI?
Unify Sales Teams and Build Long-Term Customer Value

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Talent Suite Resources

Korn Ferry Sell

Talent Suite

Korn Ferry Assess

Korn Ferry Pay

Success Profiles