Recognition Needs No Holiday

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|September 9, 2024

Recognition Needs No Holiday

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison explains why you shouldn’t wait for a special occasion to tell your colleagues that they are appreciated.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

Row after row, rack after rack—hearts and flowers, sunsets and rainbows, pumpkins and cornucopias. And, ironically, most with the same message.

While picking out a birthday card recently, I wandered through a dizzying display for every occasion—and in every size, design, font, and ink color. Halloween cards had already made their appearance (along with candy in the next aisle)—and I did a double take to see Thanksgiving greetings more than two months ahead of time.

Opening cards at random, I searched for that perfect message. To my surprise, though, one after the other said the same thing with only a little variation: I don’t tell you often enough how much you mean to me.  I wish I could express how special you are.

Curious, I began opening other cards for every occasion from “get well” to “bon voyage”—and there it was again: I should have told you.  Even Thanksgiving greetings offered amends for everything unsaid throughout the year.

The sheer magnitude of all those cards—for every celebration and commemoration—told me one thing: There must be a heck of a lot of people who wished they’d taken the time to tell someone how they really feel. And that’s probably true for all of us at one time or another.

Two of the most powerful words we can say are “thank you” in all its forms, including “I see you,” “I appreciate you,” and “You make a difference.” When people are told, “We couldn’t have done this without you,” the message that’s really being delivered is, “You are loved.”

It’s a fundamental truth of our human nature: We all want to be loved; we all want to belong.

This is the power of affiliation—of relating and connecting to others. As our firm’s research shows, that’s a major motivator. It’s the emotional side of leadership.

As Ken Blanchard, the leadership guru, likes to say, “It’s catching people doing things right.”

So how do we do it?

Be intentional. Believe it, mean it, say it, do it.Do it in the moment… and often.

Recognition needs no holiday.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by