End-of-Summer Books to Read—ASAP

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 21, 2024

End-of-Summer Books to Read—ASAP

It’s not too late for an end-of-summer read. Our consultants queued up a special booklist to crack before Labor Day.

Let’s be honest: It hasn’t been a big summer for reading. The available excuses are many, from watching the Olympics to following the presidential race to enjoying the nice weather. All of which means that you haven’t yet cracked that book. It’s not too late: You can still squeeze it in. Korn Ferry consultants are voracious readers of relevant business titles, new and old. Here are the half dozen titles our partners advise readers to enjoy in these dog days of August.

What It Takes: Lessons in the Pursuit of Excellence

By Stephen A. Schwarzman

The Blackstone co-founder takes readers from his dad’s linen shop, where he worked in his youth, to the top of the investment world, all the while leaning on lessons about goals and culture. “He never settled on talent,” says Kate Romanowicz, senior client partner in the Global Private Markets practice at Korn Ferry. “Always hire tens!”

The Five Temptations of a CEO: A Leadership Fable

By Patrick Lencioni

Lencioni traces the pitfalls that can lure CEOs off the path of success, such as aiming for harmony instead of engendering productive conflict. Our experts recommend the book to anyone in management. “There’s lots to learn about leadership, even if you’re not a CEO,” says organizational-strategy expert Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

On Call: A Doctor’s Journey in Public Service

By Anthony Fauci, M.D.

Fauci, who has been called “America’s doctor,” writes about a career in infectious disease that has spanned tuberculosis, HIV, and COVID. In working for seven different presidents, Fauci discovered a flexibility in himself that he had never imagined, says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics, yet he remained consistent throughout in his values: “honesty, integrity, and not letting yourself be swayed by politics or other considerations.”

The First 90 Days: Proven Strategies for Getting Up to Speed Faster and Smarter

By Michael D. Watkins

This guide to jumping into a new leadership role has become a classic that is regularly passed around in business circles. “It is a wonderful guide as I transition into my new role,” says Radhika Papandreou, our newly minted president, North America, at Korn Ferry.

The Anxious Generation: How the Great Rewiring of Childhood Is Causing an Epidemic of Mental Illness

By Jonathan Haidt

If you want to understand Gen Z as well as Gen Alpha, reading this book is a strong start. “It goes deep into the two demographics’ intellectual and social development,” says industrial and specialty distribution expert Dustin Ogden, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “It’s insightful in understanding where these cohorts are coming from, mentally and socially.”

Love, Hope & Leadership

By Gary Burnison

We’d be remiss to not mention our CEO’s latest book, a collection of perspectives on modern leadership. Flip through its to-the-point directives, which remind managers, executives, and entrepreneurs that the best leaders are empathetic, inclusive, and authentic, and help others thrive.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership Consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kate Romanowicz
Senior Client Partner, Private Markets, North America & EMEA

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Radhika Papandreou
President, North America

Dustin Ogden
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Business Transformation

Leadership Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by