5 Steps to a Powerful Sales Coaching Program

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Sales Transformation|September 23, 2024

5 Steps to a Powerful Sales Coaching Program

Formal and dynamic sales coaching boosts performance and drives growth. Learn how to set up a sales coaching program with our five-step guide.

Key takeaways

Why it’s essential to have specific, granular goals for any coaching program
The ideal length between coaching sessions
Whether participants should get to choose their coach

High-Impact Sales Coaching in 5 Steps

A formal coaching program can be a game changer for sales teams, boosting quota attainment and win rates while slashing voluntary turnover, according to our 2024 Sales Maturity Survey. Dynamic coaching goes a step further, integrating coaching into a broader enablement framework and intertwining it with seller training.

By challenging and supporting salespeople, a robust coaching program provides a place where they can push their own boundaries with clear goals in sight. “It’s the best way to keep top performers in their healthy stretch zone,” explains Korn Ferry’s enterprise coaching expert Christopher Paterson.

Ready to take your informal coaching program to the next level? Here are five steps to get there.

1. Define Your Goals

Effective sales coaches work with reps to diagnose, develop, and reinforce behaviors that improve performance and sales results. That’s why it’s important to make the goals of your coaching program as specific and granular as possible.

Getting down to a detailed level provides clarity on what’s expected from the outset. It also makes the coaching program easier to measure.

If you’re having trouble getting that micro, Paterson recommends taking a step back, looking at the wider company strategy, and drilling down from there. "Look at where the company is going, or where the sales division is going, and consider your role in that. From there, you can set up training goals that service the overall strategy while linking to the individual.”

Every goal should also be both observable and binary, says Paterson. “Observable refers to what you will specifically see, and binary means you either did it or you didn't do it.”

2. Develop a Coaching Plan

When pulling together a coaching plan, the goals of the program will influence the coaching tactics, techniques, and tools you use. You can also tailor these to the specific needs of the individual or group you or your leaders will coach. For example, a goal to improve stakeholder relationships may involve plotting out strong and vulnerable relationships on a network mapping tool. Coaches can then use open questions to identify ways to shift specific relationships.

When it comes to how frequently coaches should meet with those being coached, Paterson says consistency is key.

“You can form or break a pattern of behavior in about 21 days,” he says. “So, as a rule, try starting with three weeks between sessions. When you meet again, ask what’s changed, what worked, and where the challenges are.” From there, you can decide if you need to change how often you meet to achieve the goals. You may also want to book extra coaching sessions around key events, such as presenting to a new prospect or closing an important deal.

3. Choose Your Coaches and Train Them

You don’t necessarily need to hire professional coaches to implement an effective sales coaching program. They don’t even need to come from sales—interestingly, sales managers don’t always make the best sales coaches. Any leader in your organization can be trained to develop their coaching toolkit. Paterson says the core skills they’ll need for success include active listening, genuine curiosity about the salesperson’s aspirations, and a level of confidence to keep people accountable.

The most effective coaches are often the ones who were trained to apply a systems thinking lens and ask questions that prompt the individual to broaden their scope. The well-known coaching model called GROW can be a good starting point for teaching leaders how to have effective coaching conversations. Each letter represents a step in the model:

Goal: Setting the goal.
Reality: Discussing the reality and challenges of reaching it.
Options: Uncovering the options to get them there.
Way forward: Letting the individual choose a way forward.

4. Implement the Program and Set Expectations

Once coaches are trained and sessions are scheduled, provide participants with information on what to expect and how to get the most out of their sessions.

“Guide participants on how to prepare for their first meeting and how to take responsibility for their own goals,” says Paterson. “Set expectations that there is going to be a specific outcome and measure in place, and their coach isn’t going to give them all the answers."

Organizations that are most effective also see coaching as a relationship, allowing people to truly connect with their coach and break through any psychological barriers holding them back. Paterson recommends letting people meet potential coaches informally beforehand. Participants should then be allowed to decide who will coach them. And allowing some time for chemistry to develop before coaching begins will help build trust.

5. Ask for Feedback

Constant feedback ensures participants stay engaged and motivated—and reach their goals. “Ask people what they’re doing differently and what impact that’s having on their work and on them as a person,” Paterson says.

It’s also critical to use feedback to identify areas for improvement in the coaching program and ensure it is meeting its goals.

Sales Effectiveness

Breakthrough to immediate, predictable and sustainable sales effectiveness

Learn more

Empower Your Sales Teams to Reach New Heights

By anchoring coaching goals to the overall business strategy and investing in coaching processes that are defined, consistent, and measurable, organizations can empower salespeople to manage uncertainty and achieve results despite it. When sales are slowing, formal or dynamic coaching is a tool proactive leaders can use to spark some wins.

Download the Pitch Perfect eBook to find out in more detail how sales coaching can improve team performance, unlock potential, and drive growth.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Christopher Paterson
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Sales Effectiveness

Coaching

Featured Insights

How to Close Complex Tech Deals Without Discounting
CFO Exits: Domino Effect or Burnout?
The C-Suite Executives Watching Their Backs
Delivering a Recipe for Sales Success to a Global Food Supplier

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Sales Transformation

Sales Effectiveness

Coaching

Sales

Kornferry4 SS