Just Hired? 5 Essential Tips

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 23, 2024

Just Hired? 5 Essential Tips

In this environment, firms expect new employees to hit the ground running. How recent grads—and anyone else—can be ready on Day One.

Although 65% of companies plan to hire college graduates this year (according to a recent survey), many employers question the workplace readiness of these incoming employees. A recent survey found that 1 in 10 business leaders believe that most recent graduates are unprepared for the office because they lack interpersonal, problem-solving, and written- and oral-communication skills

Experts say many of these skills are best learned in the office, through observing and talking with more seasoned employees. But with many firms using a hybrid schedule, there’s less opportunity for in-person interactions. “New hires and recent college graduates are not having as many conversations with professionals, and therefore often operate in a vacuum,” says Korn Ferry Advance coach David Meintrup.

With the shift to hybrid-work schedules, new hires will need to be proactive about understanding the company culture and learning from their colleagues, says Sharon Egilinsky, a partner in Korn Ferry’s ESG and Sustainability Solutions team. Here are five essential steps for any new hire to take when starting a new position.

Develop a strong relationship with your manager and coworkers.

Your first goal should be to build a rapport with your manager and coworkers. Find out if the members of your department typically go into the office on the same day. Maybe they meet once a month for lunch or happy hour.

Beyond the niceties of learning about your colleagues, you’ll want to understand their work styles, Meintrup says. Find out if your manager has any pet peeves about how work should be delivered. “It’s easy to step on land mines if you don’t ask,” Meintrup says. For instance, maybe your boss expects all marketing memos to include data that backs up your recommendations. Or maybe they request that all documents be shared via Google Docs, not Word.

Build a network beyond your department.

While your company will do its best to onboard you, new hires often need to do some independent outreach to colleagues outside their department, Egilinsky says.

If you’re not sure who to reach out to, Egilinsky suggests starting with the people who interviewed you. In addition, ask your hiring manager and your boss for a list of colleagues they recommend you meet.

One of the benefits of a hybrid workplace is it can be less intimidating to make requests like this. You can reach out through email—as opposed to walking down the hallway to ask for a meeting, Egilinsky says. Request a fifteen-minute phone call or Zoom to learn about who they are and what they do. Prepare at least two interesting questions to ask during that meeting, she recommends.

Learn about the business.

It’s not enough to know how to do your job. You also need to understand how what you do fits into the larger context of the business. If it’s a public company, listen to earnings calls to get a sense of how leaders speak about the business and its goals and challenges, Egilinsky says. Read the most recent annual report and keep an eye on any relevant business news, including changes in stock prices.

Think before you speak.

Before you react to a remark by your boss or a colleague, think about how you’re going to come across. “Not everything you think should come out of your mouth,” Meintrup says. Consider the work topics or issues that trigger strong reactions in you, then think about a thoughtful response rather than blurting something out, he says.

Show you’re trustworthy.

Until they know you better, your boss and colleagues will wonder if they can trust you to get the job done. During your interview, you sold the company on your potential to succeed, but now you must deliver on what you promised, Meintrup says. When you’re given a deadline or asked to complete an assignment, make sure you get it done on time. You want to develop a reputation such that people know they can throw work at you and you’ll get it done, Meintrup says.

For more expert career advice, connect with a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

David Meintrup
Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

Career Transition & Outplacement

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by