The New Hiring Spike: Will It Continue?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 8, 2024

The New Hiring Spike: Will It Continue?

Surprising numbers on US hiring suggest several sectors are aggressively hiring—and could be joined by others post election.

Firms have had plenty of reasons to hold off on hiring. The skill sets needed to work with AI are in short supply. The presidential election is a toss-up.

But hiring has picked up—and then some. In a surprising development, the nation’s employers added 254,000 more employees in September than in August, according to the latest US government data. The unemployment rate fell to 4.1% from 4.2% in August. There are now more than 159 million non-farm jobs in the US, an all-time high and a 1.5% increase over last year.

At this point, experts say, desperate organizations will hire anyone with specific skills, regardless of other priorities. “Technology roles, specifically cybersecurity- and AI-related roles, are in high demand,” says Ron Seifert, a Korn Ferry senior client partner and leader in its North America Workforce Reward and Benefits business.

Healthcare continues to be one of the biggest drivers of employment growth. The sector added 45,000 more jobs, while social-assistance roles in such areas as childcare or rehabilitation added another 26,500. “Nonprofit healthcare organizations, including academic hospitals, have been steadily growing,” says Liz Schaefer, a senior client partner and practice leader in Korn Ferry’s Professional Search division with a focus on human resources.

Other sectors that added significant payroll include leisure and hospitality (+78,000), construction (+25,000), professional services (+17,000), and retail (+16,000).

Companies have laid off fewer workers as well. So far in 2024, an average of 1.6 million US workers have been laid off per month, much lower than the 1.9 million per month laid off in 2019—which many experts regard as a very good year for both job seekers and employees.

In some instances, large companies may feel that they have too many management layers, but the number of people in management actually hasn’t changed much: It increased by only 6,400 in September, to 2.57 million—nearly identical to the 2.56 million roles in September 2023.

Some organizations could be holding off on making significant hiring decisions until after the US election. “A bunch of clients are waiting until after the election to reopen postings,” says Paul Fogel, a sector leader for Korn Ferry specializing in mid-level executive searches for consumer and technology firms. Indeed, about 20% of chief financial officers say their firms have postponed plans due to uncertainty around the election, according to a late-summer survey conducted by Duke University.

Depending on which candidate wins, some sectors could get boosts, or suffer setbacks, but experts say that organizations likely can adapt in any environment, assuming they know what that environment is. “Leaders don't care about the landscape, but they would like some certainty,” Seifert says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

Elizabeth Schaefer
Senior Client Partner, Human Resources Officers Practice, Executive Search

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by