When Everyone is Stuck

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 9, 2024

When Everyone is Stuck

Workforce turnover has dropped by a third, leaving employees trapped in roles they may not like. What’s a good leader to do?

After five years on the job, the employee could do her job in her sleep. Her enthusiasm had slipped, but she still got her work done, with exemplary performance in key areas and enviable institutional knowledge. Observing all of this, her manager wondered: Did she want to be there? How could he keep her motivated?

This is the norm for nearly all managers: 19% of employees are actively applying and interviewing to leave their current roles within the next three months, and an additional 49% are considering other job options, according to the Korn Ferry Workforce 2024 Report. Yet at the same time, voluntary job turnover has dipped from 17% in 2022 to 12%, according to data from Aon, meaning that people are interested in moving on—yet stuck. “There’s nowhere for them to go,” says Deepali Vyas, global head of the FinTech, Crypto and Payments practice for Korn Ferry. “The job market is so tight that there are very few positions, and not a boatload of opportunities.”

The situation, which has been exacerbated by recent inflation spikes and increases in costs like groceries, is making employees feel stuck. Rather than gamble on joining an organization as the newest employee (and the first to go in a recession), many workers are reluctantly opting for dependable income, says Dennis Deans, Korn Ferry’s vice president of global human resources: “They’re buying time.” This is a headache for any manager who seeks engaged, enthusiastic employees.

The first step to addressing the matter, say experts, is determining whether employees are there by choice. “You don’t want employees there only because no one else wants them,” says organizational strategy expert Maria Amato, a senior client partner at Korn Ferry. She advises managers to focus on creating roles that make employees want to stay. Another strategy: Offer lateral moves, which allow for career development, says David Vied, Korn Ferry's global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics. This approach can require a bit of employee education, as most workers assume that they should always move upward. But lateral moves can be particularly valuable at top firms, where employees know they already have one of the best jobs in the field, and “people get really stale in their roles,” says Vied. “They’re bored, and their efficiency diminishes.”

Experts also advise focusing on ways to offer advancement and continued progression. This is an opportunity for conversations about expanding or restructuring current roles, says engagement expert Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. “Let’s think about the tasks on an employee’s plate, and see if we can structure them around maximizing contribution and long-term growth.” This can be particularly useful for employees under 30, who often say that their roles don’t allow them to exercise their full abilities, according to the Korn Ferry global employee-opinion database.

When in doubt, flexibility remains king: It’s the number-one priority among employees, according to the Korn Ferry Workforce 2024 Report.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Dennis Deans
Global Human Resources Business Partner

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Talent Acquisition

Assessment & Succession

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership Development

Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by