Growth, Barely

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 15, 2024

Growth, Barely

The current earnings season shows that many firms are having a tough time increasing sales significantly. Why?

It beats a sales decline, at least.

Analysts project a 4.8% year-over-year increase in earnings for S&P 500 firms, marking the fifth consecutive quarter of growth. But historically, that’s not much of an increase. If expectations come to pass, 2024’s growth would be slightly over 4.0%, the lowest of any non-recession year in the 21st century.

That growth, in many places, isn’t “real,” either, since the gains come not from companies’ marketing acumen or product superiority, but rather from their passing along of higher costs to customers. In retail, for instance, a 2% to 3% revenue gain is effectively “flat,” since it’s just keeping pace with inflation, says Craig Rowley, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in retail firms. “It’s one reason executives are cranky,” he says. ​

The growth—or lack thereof—could cause several more problems down the road. When a company doesn’t grow, its employees may become disenchanted. Activist investors may question whether a CEO and board of directors are up to their jobs. “If you want a less meat-grinder life as a CEO, grow the top line, predict profitability accurately, and have an employee base that’s happy and engaged,” says Korn Ferry global vice chair Jane Edison Stevenson.

To be sure, there are some fields—for instance, life sciences and AI-focused technology—that are growing just fine. But experts say they’re the outliers. The tailwinds that propelled big revenue gains in the first two decades of the new century have died down. Developed economies aren’t growing much at all. China’s economic growth has slowed down considerably. And while interest rates have come down, they remain at levels that make mergers and acquisitions cost prohibitive.

But experts say there’s more that leaders can do to spur growth at their own organizations. Developing economies might not be growing as fast as they were a decade ago, but they’re still moving faster than advanced economies. Yet many CEOs avoid them, preferring to wring more market share out of the US. “Companies are not focusing on where the opportunities for growth are,” says Jean-Marc Laouchez, president of the Korn Ferry Institute.

The biggest key to future growth, many experts say, is innovation, whether it’s new gadgets that save consumers time and money, or breakthrough manufacturing processes that make products faster, better, or cheaper. Aside from AI, says Grant Duncan, Korn Ferry managing director and sector lead for media, entertainment, and digital, EMEA, most companies are focusing on incremental, not ambitious improvements. “Where are the big ideas?” he asks.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

Jean-Marc Laouchez
President, The Korn Ferry Institute

Grant Duncan
Senior Client Partner, Managing Director & Sector Lead for Consumer

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by