Gen Z’s Newest Concern: Job Discrimination

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 13, 2024

Gen Z’s Newest Concern: Job Discrimination

UK Gen-Z job seekers claim they experience discrimination three times as often as older candidates do. Is it true?

In recent years, aging baby boomers seeking new jobs have claimed they’ve faced increasing discrimination. But in a surprise development, the youngest generation of job seekers now say they are being discriminated against even more.

According to a new survey of 2,000 people, more than one in three UK Gen-Z candidates believed they were discriminated against while applying for work. Only 12% of older job candidates made the same complaint. The specifics of the discrimination Gen Z cited included age, ethnicity, weight, and hair color. “These perceptions are their reality,” says Neelam Chohan, associate client partner in Korn Ferry’s ESG and DE&I practices. “In reality, your beliefs drive your behaviors and actions.”

A slew of recent stories about Gen Z’s work habits, with managers complaining about the younger generation’s lack of dedication and unwillingness to collaborate, may be making these candidates wary, even anxious. But Emma Burgess, vice president for client solutions for Korn Ferry’s Recruitment Process Outsourcing practice in EMEA, says many companies aren’t providing enough—if any—feedback to candidates. As many as 77% of people seeking work claim employers ghosted them after the COVID-19 lockdowns. The absence of a concrete reason for not getting a job can create a mental vacuum. “The easiest thing when you don’t know what’s happening becomes applying your own logic,” she says. “Some candidates assume it's discrimination.”

Perception also comes down to worries about applying for roles. One survey shows 32% of Gen Zers don’t even bother applying for certain jobs out of a fear of potential discrimination. “Candidates need to feel they are applying to work at an inclusive employer,” Burgess says, adding that she believes more companies need to treat their potential talent as a consumer-led experience. Either way, on a global level, the stakes for Gen Z are high: Experts forecast it will make up the largest portion of the workforce as soon as next year. As Burgess sees it, a diverse workforce needs to include the full generational spectrum, including Gen Z, in order to produce more innovation and improve financial performance. “There is a direct correlation between diversity and share price,” she says.

Traditionally, some hiring managers have sought candidates who fit in with the corporate culture, Chohan says. But to grab more Gen-Z workers, experts say, firms need to look beyond academic qualifications, since many younger workers are focusing more on skill sets, not degrees. “The future workforce is about what skills you can bring, and what skills the company can leverage,” she says. “That’s more important than what degree you earned.” Savvy executives know that attracting Gen-Z candidates requires things like a digital approach, feedback (so individuals can do better next time), and transparency, Burgess says. “Gen Z gets engaged when they use the latest recruitment technology, including AI,” she says. “So many companies don’t offer that.”

Some experts say companies also need to use more sophisticated techniques to identify the traits, competencies, and experiences required for specific positions, says Drew Hill, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. Firms should focus on a particular attribute only when it is a key to success, he says, and they should dismiss any variables—such as age, ethnicity, or gender—that might disadvantage a particular group.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Recruitment capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Drew Hill
Senior Client Partner

Emma Burgess

VP, Client Solutions, RPO EMEA

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by