Why ‘Genius’ Teams Need Purpose

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 19, 2024

Why ‘Genius’ Teams Need Purpose

Best-selling author Dan Goleman explains how top teams need help to productively manage their conflict and energy.

Daniel Goleman is author of the international best-seller Emotional Intelligence and Optimal: How to Sustain Personal and Organizational Excellence Every Day. He is a regular contributor to Korn Ferry.

Think of the most high-performing team you have ever known or been a part of – a top team capable of handling massive amounts of complexity while generating surprising and original solutions.

According to a recent article in the Harvard Business Review, these genius teams aren’t just characterized by their analytical skills and drive to achieve: at their core, members of these top teams are committed to and driven by a sense of purpose. Their desire for meaningful change goes well beyond a simple mission statement. Their big “why” is what keeps them rooted in action, committed under pressure, and capable of navigating “generative tension,” a term used to describe a productive way of navigating the conflict that arises in a group of passionate and powerful people.

Merete Wedell-Wedellsborg, a psychologist with over two decades of direct work with executive teams, describes what this looks like. “The genius executive teams I’ve observed have learned how to constantly manage messiness, chaos, conflict, and energy in a way that is stimulating, meaningful, and constructive, while preserving the integrity of the individual team members,” she writes. “They handle confrontation, contradictions, dysfunctions, and setbacks with a purpose.”

This orientation aligns with what the research has shown to be the most effective form of leadership: a style characterized by a clear sense of purpose, a passion for learning, and a willingness to be wrong. Rather than using the command-and-control style of leadership many organizations once prized—which countless studies have shown leads to a negative culture and poor organizational climate—great leaders motivate others by being inspiring and showing their willingness to engage in mutual learning. These leaders are open to new ideas and take a “we” mentality to moving them forward, coaching and mentoring others towards a shared vision of a better future.

Nora Bateson, a nationally known multidisciplinary thinker who studies the ecology of living systems, puts it this way: “In the past the world understood leadership as the great deeds of heroes. Now we are in another phase of global transition that requires an understanding of leadership based on our understanding of interdependency.”

This “we” mentality—so central to the purpose movement—is exactly what allows genius teams to succeed. While individual members may have strong opinions and beliefs, no one person is a know-it-all. In these teams, the desire one person has to “win” or “achieve” is tempered by a consistent focus on what is best for the process and the people. In this sense, the focus is less on being the best individual than it is on finding the best idea to move a mission forward. These genius team members come to the table committed to something beyond their need to be “right.”

“When observing a genius team, you notice the vibrancy and suspense in the room. Something is at stake for everyone, and interactions teeter on the edge of confrontation,” writes Wedell-Wedellsborg. “There is a high level of psychological arousal, with people leaning forward, speaking passionately, going to the drawing board, challenging one another. Dull moments are rare.”

This ability to navigate tension and conflict—to be passionate but open to being wrong—is what leads to breakthroughs. One genius team member told Wedell-Wedellsborg that their weekly meetings are akin to a chemistry experiment. Everyone brings their most potent ingredients to the table and they are vigorously mixed in order to see what happens.

Among the genius teams Wedell-Wedellsborg has worked with, one is seeking to accelerate the green energy transition, another is focused on fostering more creativity in future generations, and another aims to democratize investments. Ultimately, purpose is the motivating factor that inspires them to show up and put in the time, energy, and effort that come with holding their executive role.

“In many ways I feel that we possess a special superpower: that ours is a particularly meaningful purpose,” one genius team member told Wedell-Wedellsborg. “We are making a contribution to the world. One that is worth getting out of bed for in the morning and worth fighting for. I think that’s exactly what we need to stay motivated for decades.”

Co-written by Elizabeth Solomon

Click here to learn more about Daniel Goleman's Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Daniel Goleman
Contributor, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

People Strategy & Performance

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by