5 Hidden Ways Hiring Managers Test You

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 6, 2026

5 Hidden Ways Hiring Managers Test You

The interview starts before you enter the building, with your parking job and coffee-cup disposal.

You’ve heard about the sneaky ways that hiring managers “test” candidates, such as bringing a job candidate into the coffee-break room to see whether they eventually bring their dirty cup to the sink. Or asking a question in the foreign language the candidate’s résumé claims they’re proficient in. Professional hirers have tricks up their sleeve when it comes to gaining intel on candidates.

The tests are there for a reason: to allow the recruiter to assess everything from cultural alignment to situational awareness. And they’re much more critical today, when candidates can use AI to create a false front. “Small, informal moments can surface behaviors that don’t show up in a structured interview,” says Anya Weaver, a principal consultant at Korn Ferry. For example, a candidate’s lunchtime order can reveal everything from a mindfulness about spending corporate money to a problem with alcohol.

So, what are recruiters looking for?

Outfit

Your sartorial choices matter both at the interview and en route. “I once hid at an airport to see how a candidate dressed when flying,” says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics at Korn Ferry. The scrutiny made sense, he says, for a high-level role that required both a tech background and a senior-executive persona. Recruiters will also scan for appropriate attire, such as long-enough socks.

Car

What brand is your car? How old is it? Is the interior messy? Has it been to a car wash since the pandemic? Did you park between the lines? For public-facing roles, especially in towns where executives are likely to be recognized, recruiters clock these details.

Pen

What kind of pen does the candidate use when signing in at the front desk? “It gives a clue to ego and personality,” says Vied. “You don’t want to see a fancy pen around entry-level sales people.” Ideally, brands communicate self-confidence, but not too much. Details like watches and pens matter most for sales and commercial roles, says Vied.

Ambiguity

That baffling interview question—the one that made you question the interviewer’s competence—was a test. Recruiters sometimes ask vague or unanswerable questions to watch how you handle uncertainty. Did you freeze? Barrel forward? Or do the smart thing and ask for clarification?

Behavior

No, the administrative assistant is not just checking you in. She’s been asked to report back on your politeness and promptness. Some firms make candidates wait longer than expected, to observe how they handle delays and stress. Others plant a staffer in the same space to see whether the candidate asks questions about the other person, or prattles on.

For more career advice, read Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison's latest book, I Need a Job!

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Anya Weaver
Principal Consultant

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Career Advice

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by