Managing Costs in High-Volume Recruiting

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Talent Recruitment|July 30, 2024

Managing Costs in High-Volume Recruiting

Discover how recruitment process outsourcing (RPO) can revolutionize your high-volume hiring strategy. Learn to maximize value, control costs, and boost quality.

Key takeaways

The key benefits of recruitment process outsourcing
How this powerful strategy can help you control costs when hiring at scale
How RPO improves hiring quality

High-Volume Hiring on a Budget

Picture this: You need to hire hundreds or even thousands of employees for a new project or seasonal work. Your first instinct might be to bulk up your internal talent acquisition team. But what happens when the project or season ends?

You don’t want to keep paying those additional team members when your recruiting needs slow down. But laying off and re-hiring internal talent acquisition professionals based on recruitment volume comes with extra costs for onboarding and training. Plus, your employer brand could take a hit from the staff turnover.

One solution is recruitment process outsourcing (RPO).

What Is RPO, and How Can It Help You with High-Volume Hiring?

“An RPO partner can quickly bring in the right recruiting talent when volume is increasing without the permanent fixed costs to employ a larger internal team,” says Juliana Barela, an expert in RPO at Korn Ferry.

At the same time, you avoid the costly cycle of hiring and laying off internal recruiters. “RPO flexes to your needs,” she adds.

Here are four more ways RPO can help you manage large-scale recruitment costs while driving hiring performance.

1. Transparent Hiring Costs

Nearly 90% of HR professionals don’t know how much their organization spends annually to acquire top talent, according to a Korn Ferry poll. Being unclear about cost-per-hire makes budgeting for hiring expenses a challenge.

An RPO partnership brings crystal-clear visibility to your recruitment expenses. Pull quote: “Pricing is determined as cost per hire, so you know exactly what the total amount will be based on volume,” says Barela. “There are no surprises.”

“Pricing is determined as cost per hire, so you know exactly what the total amount will be based on volume. There are no surprises.”

2. Standardized Processes

For companies with complex, multi-site operations, standardizing the TA model through RPO can save time and money. “Each region hires differently,” says Barela. “An RPO provider can create consistency within the process and make it scalable.”

A well-designed RPO solution offers:

Centralized processes that drive cost efficiencies
Economies of scale across locations
Flexibility to adapt to local nuances and job families

Whether you’re hiring manufacturing operatives in the U.S. or tech specialists in Asia, an RPO model ensures consistency without sacrificing local expertise.

3. Cutting-Edge Technology

When it comes to high-volume recruiting tools, technology is your best friend. But keeping up with the latest and greatest tools can be a full-time job.

“Most organizations, even tech companies, typically invest their dollars in go-to-market products, not internal processes like talent acquisition technology,” says Barela.

An RPO services provider will work with you to create a tailored solution that puts sophisticated technology at your fingertips, optimizing things like sourcing channels, candidate management, and analytics.

By leveraging advanced tools and data-driven insights, you’ll maximize both efficiency and outcomes—all while keeping a laser focus on ROI.

4. Better-Quality Hires

One of the high-volume recruiting challenges companies can face is a high no-show rate due to poor communication with candidates. Even when new hires do show up, they won’t make it through the training program if they aren’t the right fit.

A top-notch talent partner can help you:

Enhance sourcing strategies to attract better candidates
Streamline communication with candidates and new hires
Refine assessment methods to ensure cultural fit

“Because you get the right people showing up, they make it through the training, and you have a higher retention rate,” says Barela.

The payoff? Better-quality hires, reduced early attrition, and lower costs associated with turnover and training.

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

More than RPO — talent realized

Learn more

A Superior Way to Hire at Scale

In today’s ever-changing talent landscape, managing the cost of hiring new employees while maintaining quality is a delicate balancing act. By embracing the recruitment outsourcing model, you can improve your high-volume recruiting strategies, ensuring you attract the best talent without breaking the bank.

Ready to transform your approach to hiring at scale and unlock the full potential of your TA function?

Download our eBook Recruitment Cost Control and Risk Mitigation: 6 Benefits of Outsourcing to discover how RPO can revolutionize your entire recruitment process.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Juliana Barela
Senior Vice President & General Manager, North America RPO, Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Talent Acquisition

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Featured Insights

In-house or Outsource? Getting Talent Acquisition Right
Hiring Tech Talent at Scale
Beyond RPO: Elevating Your Talent Acquisition Strategy
6 Benefits of RPO: Unleashing Talent Acquisition Potential

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Talent Recruitment

Talent Acquisition

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Kornferry RPO