Staying Out... of Politics

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 23, 2024

Staying Out... of Politics

In a month of upheaval worldwide, CEOs are weighing the pros and cons of speaking out on political issues.

These days, the US presidential campaign—along with its constant drama—is all anyone in the country can talk about. The topic comes up during internal work, pre-meeting banter, coffee breaks, and nearly everywhere else employees talk to one another. But when it comes to the man or woman in the corner office, politics remains a dicey issue to bring up.

Indeed, one survey this year found that 36% of workers would consider leaving their jobs if their CEO expressed political views they disagreed with. Among 18- to 34-year-olds, that figure jumps to 44% percent. And more than half of all workers—56%—said that political talk during meetings makes them uncomfortable. “I think it is best if executive leaders simply say ‘We focus on operating our company by taking care of our employees and our stakeholders, and weighing in on political agendas is not what we do,’” says Alan Guarino, vice chairman in Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice.

Political issues are, of course, mounting all over the globe, with elections everywhere from the UK to India sparking heated debate. Even so, says Paul Fogel, Korn Ferry’s sector leader in professional search, CEOs need to say as little as possible. “As polarized as it is right now, it’s probably best to stay out of it, especially at a publicly traded company.” The rationale for this, experts say, is straightforward: A leader’s public statement might energize stakeholders who agree with it, but it almost certainly will anger people—both inside and outside the firm—who don’t.

But others worry that saying nothing or reacting awkwardly has a cost too. “It’s tough to be in HR right now,” says David Vied, global sector leader of Korn Ferry’s Medical Devices and Diagnostics practice; this political season, he observes, is making many leaders uneasy. “Now it’s often expected for CEOs to take stands,” says Dan Kaplan, senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s CHRO practice.

For her part, Kate Shattuck, global co-leader of Korn Ferry’s Impact Investing, ESG and Sustainability practice, says she is less concerned about what CEOs say than she is about off-the-cuff political remarks managers might make. Few companies, she points out, provide any training to managers about how to handle political comments—their own or an employee’s—or how to address charged situations that can arise from political discussions emerging. “CEO are well positioned to give values-based reflection and balanced points,” she says. “Managers down the line, however, might not know how to be a voice of calm.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership Consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Alan Guarino
Vice Chairman, CEO and Board Services

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development