5 Ways to Not Get Laid Off

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 21, 2024

5 Ways to Not Get Laid Off

Surveys suggest firms will be cutting back on staff as much this year as they did last year. Can you avoid being targeted?

As companies begin tightening their belts, more employees are bracing for potential layoffs. Indeed, seven in 10 workers say they are preparing for this possibility, according to a new survey.

Their fears are fueled by recent data on rising unemployment—which has hit a new three-year high. Meanwhile, at least 132,000 employees have been laid off at 400 tech companies this year, according to one layoff tracker. “Many organizations are thinking about costs differently and are trying to get ahead of economic headwinds,” says Mark Royal, a senior client partner for Korn Ferry Advisory.

But experts say that firms and managers tend to apply a decent amount of discretion in making layoff decisions, and that employees might be able to avoid being targeted even if their departments are being scaled back. Here are some possible steps to consider:

Be more visible.

Think about how you are showing up at work—how often you go into the office, speak up at meetings, or check in with your manager. “In addition to making your way into the office more often, be more present at meetings,” Royal says. It’s important to not just attend meetings, but to contribute to them, he says.

Now is a also good time to check in with your manager more frequently. Make sure the projects you are prioritizing align with your manager’s objectives and overall company goals, Royal says.

Focus on the right metrics.

Determine what metric your annual performance will be evaluated on—be it sales, customer service, bringing in new clients, or something else—and make sure everything you are working on feeds into that goal, Royal says. “Are you focused on the right things, or are you getting distracted from core tasks and key contributions?”

If you’re not fully focused on the metric that will determine your overall performance, it’s time to shift your priorities, he says.

Deliver value.

Make sure you are delivering as much value as you can to your team and organization. “When it comes to working at an organization during a challenging time, you want to be part of the crew, not the cargo,” Royal says.

Increase your understanding of how your company is doing financially, how it makes its money, and what leadership values. Then ask yourself how best you can contribute in these areas, says Frances Weir, an associate principal with Korn Ferry Advisory.

Be a team player.

Be willing to go beyond the boundaries of your current role and job description without an immediate raise or title change. When companies are looking to streamline, they often consider letting go of the employees who are the least adaptable, Weir points out. “Show that you are willing to jump in when needed, even if the work falls outside your defined role,” she says.

Cultivate relationships.

One of the best ways to shore up employment security is to continually build and renew professional relationships, says Korn Ferry Advance career and leadership coach Val Olson. Don’t limit yourself to befriending only colleagues in your own department. Develop strong relationships with people in other departments.

Look beyond your company and develop new contacts through professional organizations and conferences, while maintaining relationships with past bosses and colleagues, Olson says. Adds Weir: “Should your name ever end up on ‘the list,’ you want to know that people can passionately advocate for you.”

For more expert career advice, connect with a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Upskilling & Reskilling

Workforce Management

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

Assessment & Succession

Cultural Transformation

Change Management

Business Transformation

People Cost Optimization

Career Transition & Outplacement

Talent Acquisition

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by