The AI Blindspot

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 13, 2024

The AI Blindspot

As companies pour huge sums into AI, leaders worry that competitors may be creating “stealth tech weapons” that could knock even strong firms out of business. Could retail become the first battlefield?

Imagine you’re leading a successful company with thriving sales—only to have a competitor appear out of nowhere and gobble up virtually all of your business. This is the stuff of anxiety nightmares for the C-suite. It’s also a reality that AI is bringing to industries, particularly retail.

Firms currently use AI for tasks like reducing inventory, optimizing pricing, personalizing consumer recommendations, and marketing. But experts say most are in the dark about competitors’ AI strategies, which means they face the very real possibility of losing a significant chunk of their market share to a rival. This is particularly true in retail. “The speed at which a competitor can optimize across their business will make it exceptionally difficult for competitors to follow,” says John Long, North America retail sector leader at Korn Ferry, who has put together a paper explaining how this scenario might play out.

In the paper, Long refers to AI as a “stealth weapon” with great potential to produce either “ultimate value creation” or “extinction.” “Aggressive ‘first-time’ movers will win every time,” the report says. “Even many ‘fast followers’ won’t be able to catch up and survive.”

Historically, most leaders could predict the applications of an emergent new technology with reasonable accuracy. But AI has completely changed the landscape. Thirty years ago, during the digital revolution, leaders could clearly see which firms were investing in websites. Today, however, they’re in the dark. Retail firms are employing AI with varying emphases, picking their own starting points—and, by extension, different end points—making this a blind game of apples and oranges. For example, a retailer could easily emerge with leaner staff and inventory, as well as minute-to-minute pricing capability, all of which would lead to markedly lower prices. Retailers aren’t announcing their AI strategies. “That would be foolish,” says Long.

To be sure, new AI technologies will produce at least as many failures as successes. But those successes will certainly come. What’s unknown is the timeline. Companies with AI initiatives are investing an average of $5 million per year, according to recent Bain & Company figures; but among large companies, 20% are investing up to $50 million per year. As AI tools become more sophisticated through training on more and more data, leaders’ analyses and decisions will improve, and the momentum of incremental changes will build quickly. “That’s the magic of this—it will create quick separation between competitors,” says Long.

Many industries, from finance to healthcare, are oblivious to their competitors’ AI plans. But retail is likely to see the greatest shifts first, experts say. Recall that thirty years ago, Sears dominated, and Walmart was small, and no one had heard of Amazon. “Retail has so much more going on,” says Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn Ferry. A typical grocery store carries 25,000 items; a big box store holds 100,000—all of it fodder for data crunching. Compare that to a consumer-products company, which might sell 50 to 300 products. Retail is also seasonal and impacted by the economy, news cycle, and weather, which means it requires constant adjustments in both buying and delivery, says Rowley. Agility and speed deeply affect the bottom line: The first retailer to get the customer the right product at the right time wins.

For leaders kept awake at night by fears of competitors’ AI developments, experts advise assessing which of the firm’s functions are most likely to be affected by AI (in retail, for example, that might include marketing, buying, and pricing), evaluating the current tools, and envisioning what might be needed in the future. “Find the gaps,” says Long. He suggests identifying opportunities to consolidate or drive efficient decision-making, such as shifting from person-led decisions to decisions that involve prompting or querying AI.

And don’t assume that no news is good news, experts advise: If other firms aren’t chattering about AI, that doesn’t mean it’s not flourishing and evolving in their offices. “There is a blind spot,” says Deepali Vyas, global head of the FinTech, Crypto and Payments practice at Korn Ferry. “No one is saying anything.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Craig Rowley
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by