5 Hacks to Work More Efficiently

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 19, 2024

5 Hacks to Work More Efficiently

Burnout is still a major issue for employers and employees. Our experts share techniques and hacks they use to work more efficiently.

Work smarter, not harder.

It’s a mantra that has been around since the 1930s, when industrial engineer Allen Morgenstern coined the phrase for the program he created to help people be more productive with less effort. But nearly a century later, people still haven’t mastered the art. Burnout rates among employees are still hovering above pre-pandemic levels. One study from earlier this year found that 42% of employees reported feeling burnt-out sometimes; another survey showed one-quarter of employees felt that way very often or always. “How long this can last is at the forefront of every leader’s mind,” says Frances Weir, an associate principal with Korn Ferry Advisory.

The challenge of working smarter is that it’s hard to do when work keeps piling up. And burnout levels remain elevated partly because the layoffs and cost cuts of the last few years have effectively neutralized employees’ desire for better work-life balance (not to mention offset any productivity gains from technologies like AI). Being more efficient requires a combination of personal discipline, organization, mindset, and technology. With that in mind, here are some techniques, hacks, and apps our experts use to work more efficiently.

Batch tasks.

Workers often block time on their calendars to focus on a project or meet a deadline. But Flo Falayi, associate client partner for leadership development and DE&I at Korn Ferry, takes it to another level with what he calls “task batching.” Its premise: Match tasks to how your brain works at different times of the day—perhaps administrative tasks in the morning, client engagement in the afternoon, and research and learning at the end of the day. “This strategy helps me focus on high-impact activities when my head is clearest,” he says.

Change channels.

Do you know the difference between a phone call, an instant message, and an email? Sounds like a simple question, but one of the biggest workday time sucks is juggling the barrage of communication over these platforms, says David Ellis, a senior client partner in the Global Talent Acquisition Transformation practice at Korn Ferry. Even if an instant message doesn’t demand immediate attention, people tend to respond to it right away, for instance. Similarly, many people ignore emails (especially younger workers), which can necessitate numerous follow-ups. “How you use and alternate between these platforms has a huge impact on efficiency,” says Ellis.

Be antisocial.

Even if you block time on your work calendar, many other distractions can reduce your productivity, whether it’s the latest meme trending on TikTok or your daughter’s newest Instagram reel. Sometimes, not even silencing your notifications is enough. For those who don’t trust themselves to stay off social media, experts suggest apps—like Freedom and Cold Turkey—that will prevent you from accessing sites on your block list for a specific period. Think of it as an adult version of having your phone taken away.

Delegate with AI.

There’s no getting around the fact that AI is here, so you may as well make it work for you. The trick is to identify the AI tool that will increase your efficiency the most. Some people use AI for note-taking or summarizing meetings, for instance. Korn Ferry Advance career and leadership coach Val Olson uses it to help brainstorm ideas, prepare presentation templates, and write business-related documents. “It helps increase efficiency and move me forward when I feel a bit stuck,” says Olson.

Chunk it.

When it comes to big projects with multiple components, Weir keeps from getting overwhelmed by chunking the work up into achievable sizes, with deadlines for each. You can do this on a regular calendar or with visualization boards and spreadsheets like Monday.com. She says this method helps her from procrastinating and helps her build momentum and confidence as the project moves along. “An astounding number of people try to take on everything at once, which has huge implications for efficiency and burnout,” Weir says.

For more expert career advice, connect with a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Flo Falayi
Senior Client Partner, Advisory Practice

David Ellis, PhD
Senior Vice President, Talent Transformation

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

Career Transition & Outplacement

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by