Our Time for Timeless Leadership

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|October 14, 2024

Our Time for Timeless Leadership

Regardless of circumstances, effective leaders consistently do this one thing, says Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Love, Hope & Leadership: A Special Edition.

When I was a kid growing up in the Midwest, cooler temperatures and falling leaves signaled a whole set of routines. On the first weekend of October, just like clockwork, we checked the furnace, switched the car tires and raked the yard into endless mountains of yellow, gold, and red.

The calendar told the time, and we knew exactly what to do.

Today, as autumn settles into the Northern Hemisphere and the year winds down to its final quarter, change seems to be a constant.

As our firm’s research has found, the ability to respond effectively to change is one of the biggest organizational differentiators, separating the best from the rest.

As leaders, we have to act—knowing what to do, even when we don’t know what to do.

We cannot afford to wait for the circumstances to change or the circumstances will change us. This is the time for timeless leadership.

Anticipate—what lies ahead. We don’t need to be visionaries, trying to predict tomorrow. Rather, we need to accurately perceive the reality of today. This moment is the starting point for creating a vision of the future that others cannot yet see.

Navigate—course-correcting in real time. Navigation is the companion to anticipation. Together, they can keep us on an even keel. Navigation happens in the present moment, with real-time agility and adjustments. It’s proactive and purposeful.

Communicate—continually. This is where leadership lives and breathes. As leaders, we’re both the message and the messenger. And when there is trust in what we say, there will be belief in what we do.

Listen—to what we don’t want to hear. We’ve been given two ears and only one mouth for a reason—a reminder to listen twice as much as we speak.

Learn—always. There’s nothing like change to accelerate learning. That’s when we apply past experiences to new and first-time challenges. It’s called learning agility.

Lead—inspiring others to believe and then enabling that belief to become reality.

None of us can choose the times in which we lead. As the CEO of a major healthcare system shared with me recently, “Decades ago I came to the realization that it is in ambiguity—uncertainty, crisis, risk—that opportunity exists. And control is an illusion.”

But leadership is not. And that’s what all of us need right now.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by