The Dreamer in All of Us

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Special Edition|July 21, 2024

The Dreamer in All of Us

Korn Ferry CEO Gary Burnison highlights how leaders, much like the athletes at the upcoming Games in Paris, don't succeed unless they have a team supporting them.

Gary Burnison is CEO of Korn Ferry and the author of Take Control: The Career You Want, Where You Want.

Someone, somewhere has a dream.

And every dreamer needs others—inspiring, motivating, nurturing, recognizing and celebrating them every step of the way. Aspiration, after all, takes far more than one person alone.

Nowhere is that more profound than in the Olympic and Paralympic Games.

We’re pleased to share with you a Special Edition of our Korn Ferry Briefings magazine, featuring world-class athletes and the leadership lessons they reflect.

This week, the opening ceremony of the Paris 2024 Olympic Games will present a mosaic of more than 10,000 athletes from across the globe. What will be seen are the runners, gymnasts, swimmers, cyclists … Often unseen, however, is the entire team who has supported each of them throughout their lives. Family and friends. Coaches and trainers. Communities and even countries.

It’s shared interest at its best—a spirit we need more of these days. After all, leadership is never about the what and the how—it’s about creating opportunities for others.

Indeed, these are aspirations that become inspirations.

Please enjoy the Special Edition of our Korn Ferry Briefings magazine dedicated to the leaders and dreamers in all of us—and those who support us.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Gary Burnison
Chief Executive Officer

No items found.

Related Articles

All in the Same Boat
Less Noise, More Plan

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Special Edition