Essentials: The Evolving Office Life

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 1, 2024

Essentials: The Evolving Office Life

New RTO rules. New start times. New quitting times. New office furniture. New work friends. There’s a lot of change going on in the workplace in 2024.

Bosses made it clear last year that in 2024 employees would need to be back at the office at least some of the time. But some other changes haven’t been so choreographed. The rules of office life—written and otherwise—are being tested this year. What should the office look like? When should meetings start? When should the workday end? Can I have a close work friend?

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry looks at how firms are addressing all of these office-life questions, how the changes are affecting employee engagement and productivity, and more.

Another Spin on the RTO Wheel

One-quarter of US employees say their firms’ return-to-office rules have changed multiple times. Is the waffling causing some workers to stay home?

It’s 4 PM: Quitting Time

US workers are logging off from work, on average, earlier and earlier on Fridays. Is this a sign that they’re disengaged from their jobs?

The Office Odyssey 2024

US firms spent $44 billion redesigning their offices to be workplaces of the future. What do these new spaces look like—and how do they function?

Won’t You Be My Work Friend?

Only two in 10 people say they have a best friend at work. Companies are aware of how much culture matters, but they say that trying to foster friendships couldn’t be more awkward.

The Furor Over 8 AM Meetings

As some firms return to 8 AM meetings, workers yawn, then gripe—including the 29 million of them who viewed a TikTok protest video.

The Silent Treatment—Between Gen Zers and Boomers

Forty percent of workers over 55 haven’t spoken to a Gen Zer at work in a year, and one in five Gen Zers to someone over 50. Why corporate leaders should be worried.

Click out all the stories in The 2024 Essentials (Midyear Version).

Featured Insights

Essentials: AI’s Not-Quite Takeover
Essentials: How to Find a New Role in 2024
Essentials: Briefings Podcast
Essentials: The UGH! Job Market

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by