Remote Work: A Grudging Acceptance by CEOs?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 21, 2024

Remote Work: A Grudging Acceptance by CEOs?

The number of top bosses who believe their employees will RTO full-time has dropped sharply. Yet most firms still struggle to implement hybrid arrangements.

An increasing number of CEOs might have given up on the dream of bringing everyone back to the office.

According to a recent survey, only 34% of CEOs expect workers to be in the office five days a week during the next three years. That’s a precipitous drop from 62% in the same survey last year. “There’s one CEO, there are thousands of employees, and the CEO is getting worn down,” says David Vied, global sector leader in Korn Ferry’s Medical Devices and Diagnostics practice.

The increasing acceptance of hybrid work comes at a time when many organizations still haven’t perfected these arrangements. Many hybrid managers feel they’re not getting enough training or support from senior leaders. And productivity can be hard to maintain, if scheduling is a consistent challenge. “If executives are still debating hybrid schedules, they’re not able to manage their teams or navigate tough markets,” says Dan Kaplan, a senior client partner in Korn Ferry’s CHRO practice.

Not long ago, CEOs were overwhelmingly confident that they would succeed in luring or forcing workers to return to the office. Many believed—and still do—that they can only establish and maintain a strong culture if everyone is occupying the same workplace at the same time. Research over the last three years has shown that key tasks are done far more effectively in person, including onboarding and team brainstorming. Plus, according to a recent survey, one-quarter of corporate leaders admit they are hoping RTO mandates will get people to quit—and spare them from having to carry out layoffs or trim weaker employees.

But as it turned out, early incentives, such as renovated offices with gleaming new collaborative spaces, failed to bring people back (US firms poured $44 billion into office redesign in 2023 alone). As companies got tougher in demanding that people return, leaders discovered, to their surprise, that such policies were hard to enforce. Managers had discretion to sign off on hybrid arrangements for many reasons, effectively foiling RTO strategies.

Many workers continue to fight RTO efforts. Indeed, experts say some skirt in-office requirements by showing up for five minutes and then leaving, a practice dubbed “coffee badging.” One-quarter of US employees say their firms’ return-to-office rules have changed multiple times, with 6% saying some policies have changed six times or more.

To be sure, some sectors are still fighting hard to enforce RTO policies, and the tough recent economic news may scare more workers back in. Still, experts say flexible work arrangements are consistently among the highest priorities of millions of employees, including many star performers who will be in demand in strong or weak times. “When you’re trying to pull talent away, you can’t just throw money, because there isn’t enough money,” says JP Sniffen, Korn Ferry’s practice leader in its Military Center of Expertise.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Transformation capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

JP Sniffen
Practice Leader, Military COE & Physical Security

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by