3 Ways Organizations in India Are Preparing Future Leaders

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Organizational Transformation|August 29, 2024

3 Ways Organizations in India Are Preparing Future Leaders

Discover 3 ways that organizations in India are investing in developing their people to set them up for success.

Key takeaways

How you can speed up your employees’ time to competence
What Indian organizations are doing to build leader confidence
Where to put your AI L&D budget to create impact

A competitive salary is important for employees everywhere, but the results of our Workforce 2024 survey revealed there’s a lot more to work than money.

In this survey of more than 10,000 workers around the world, we discovered that when it comes to retaining top talent, learning and development (L&D) opportunities are crucial. It was one of the top six reasons people said they would choose to stay in their current role.

In fact, for employees in India’s rapidly growing economy, L&D is the most important benefit a new employer can offer, and it’s the number one reason they stay with their current employer.

Here are three ways Indian organizations are meeting employee expectations and leading the charge in L&D.

1. Build Competency and Productivity, Fast

India’s employees—especially growth-focused Gen Zs—increasingly link learning and development with career progress. IIn a country with one of the largest populations in the world, L&D ensures people stay relevant and competitive.

Many of India’s L&D programs put clear metrics around speed to competency and productivity, focusing on areas with the biggest business impact, says Shivangi Shukla, leadership development expert at Korn Ferry. “L&D projects need to align to the business strategy and goals, making sure employees are working on real business problems and projects as part of their learning.”

This can include reinforcing the skills graduates learned in college to get them ready for work in the corporate world.

Some Indian tech companies offer ‘campus to corporate’ learning—a university-style experience for new junior hires before they join a team. And large conglomerates give new employees exposure to all business verticals, then allow them to select a career track that’s aligned to their strengths and interests.

Further up the ladder, employees have opportunities for action learning—learning by doing— collaboration, and thinking differently.

2. Combat Imposter Syndrome

Constantly shifting priorities and a need to perform and transform simultaneously is making leaders question their own capabilities. 73% of Indian CEOs in our survey admitted they have imposter syndrome—a sentiment that echoes across all employee levels.

To build self-confidence in their leaders, Indian organizations are helping them develop behavioral skills like self-awareness.

“By building an accurate view of their strengths and limitations, self-awareness helps build confidence—and helps leaders realize they can get through turbulent times,” says Shukla.

And teaching leaders how to have awareness of self and others not only helps build their confidence—it can also have a significant impact on businesses. When leaders understand their strengths and gaps, can reflect on them and adjust their behavior accordingly, they can start creating a more inclusive and supportive environment for the people around them.

Coaching can also help CEOs navigate the lonely job of a leader. It can offer a sounding board that supports them in developing the right skills and mindset, including resilience, emotional intelligence and vulnerability.

3. Invest in AI Training

Indian employees are the most excited globally about the possibilities of AI, according to our research, but they are also most likely to think it will replace them in the future.

“In India, L&D budgets are moving from educational to practical uses, helping people bring AI’s potential to life and directly impacting business outcomes,” says Sandeep Bhalla, Senior Partner and Head Consulting, India.

In many Indian organizations, senior leaders sponsor teams who show interest in AI to work on projects that can create real business impact. Some companies also run hackathon-like events where teams develop and test ideas for how they can use GenAI, while giving talent the opportunity to learn more about the technology.

Rather than having a trainer talk to people about AI, hackathons allow employees to speak to customers, understand their challenges, and work together to develop ideas for how GenAI can help solve for them.

And while AI will likely remove more manual, technical tasks, it’s unlikely to replace crucial skills, such as critical thinking. As a result, L&D programs are also focusing on the areas of exercising judgement and decision making to prepare emerging leaders for the future of work.

Leadership Development

Leaders who can tap into the power of all

Learn more

Developing Future Leaders

Lack of career opportunities are the second most important reason why people leave their jobs, our survey found.

That’s why non-linear development programs that expose people to different functions and skill sets early is becoming critical in countries like India. This approach gives future leaders a wider understanding of the business and enables mobility in the organization.

And to be successful, leaders also need to develop the ability to change direction easily amidst the evolving nature of work.

“The earlier leaders learn how to shift gears and build self-awareness, the better,” Bhalla suggests. “Many leaders in India aren’t given the skills they need to lead effectively until they’re in the job. It’s important to prepare them for the critical elements of leadership well ahead of time.”

What Do Your People Really Think about Work?

Understanding what drives your business starts with understanding your people. Download our Global Workforce Insights Report to find out what they want from work—and unleash their full potential.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Sandeep Bhalla
Senior Client Partner & Consulting Head, India

Shivangi Shukla
Principal, Advisory

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Featured Insights

How to Make Face-to-Face Work: 5 Ways
5 Ways to Tailor Skills to What Firms Want
6 Signs Leaders Lack AI-Readiness—And How to Fix It
5 Ways ‘Night Owl’ Workers Can Thrive

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Organizational Transformation

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Kornferry2 LD

Kornferry6 OS