Essentials: Briefings Podcast

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 1, 2024

Essentials: Briefings Podcast

Want to know what to do about pay raises, promotion cycles, peak performance, and more? Check out our entertaining podcast, hosted by Korn Ferry’s chief marketing officer, Jill Wiltfong.

How do you advance your career when most organizations are cutting back on the number of people they promote? Why “peak performance” might not be a goal to strive for. Can older employees work well with the latest batch of twentysomethings in the office? There’s been no shortage of big corporate leadership issues for our award-winning podcast to tackle in 2024.

In this Essentials, we highlight some of our favorite episodes of 2024. Click here to check out the entire Briefings Podcast archive.

Promotion Puzzle 2024

With companies projected to promote 10% fewer employees this year, a top career coach shares how you can still move up the corporate ladder.​

The Myth of ‘Peak’ Performance

How do you drive top performance in workers without burning them out? The author of a new book on the topic and an Olympic medalist highlight how it can be done.

Work in the Age of Ageism

Half of workers age 50 to 59 will lose their job at some point. Are they—and other older workers—getting pushed out? We talk to a job-seeking senior and a top career coach about how senior workers can improve their standing.

The Unstuck Career

Experts say people are struggling to climb the corporate ladder in this economy. Two top career experts discuss how to get out of a career rut.

Giving Workers Bad News… The Good Way?

How top corporate players deliver difficult news to employees could be the difference between courageous leadership and going viral in all the wrong ways.

Pay-Raise Roulette

After handing out big raises last year, companies are pulling back. How can top performers—and top negotiators—secure big ​bumps in 2024?

Click out all the stories in The 2024 Essentials (Midyear Version).

Featured Insights

Essentials: AI’s Not-Quite Takeover
Essentials: How to Find a New Role in 2024
Essentials: The Evolving Office Life
Essentials: The UGH! Job Market

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Briefings Podcast

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by