The Future of AI In Learning and Development: What to Expect

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|August 1, 2024

The Future of AI In Learning and Development: What to Expect

AI tools for training and development are emerging as a major game-changer. Here are the trends and opportunities to watch out for.

Key takeaways

Why generative AI is changing learning and development within organizations
The most substantial ways AI is shaping L&D
How to prepare employees and leaders for the changes AI is ushering in

AI Trends Shaping the Future of L&D

It’s thrilling for some, worrisome for others, but there’s no denying that artificial intelligence (AI) is making its way into every corner of business.

In learning and development (L&D), the question isn’t if AI will impact how companies train their people, but how. It’s becoming clearer by the day that learning and development AI will soon be an integral part of workforce education, requiring a shift in technologies and people.

How Can AI Help in Learning & Development?

Below we’ll look at what chief learning officers (CLOs) and other learning leaders can expect as AI shapes the future of L&D. And we’ll also consider what that means for organizations as AI employee training moves from the experimental phase into integrated everyday tools.

AI Will Make L&D Development Faster, Less Expensive, and More Agile

AI tools for training and development are set to affect all aspects of L&D—and likely solve some key pain points for L&D leaders.

The design process for educational resources will speed up. AI can help write training materials, delivering more content at a faster pace and more cost-effectively.

It will be possible to make content updates more frequently, enabling of-the-moment curriculum to meet changing learning styles and information needs.

And instant feedback will allow learning and development leads to be more agile and scale up programs or course-correct more quickly.

AI Will Change Roles and Responsibilities Within L&D

“It currently takes huge teams of L&D practitioners to deliver learning programs,” says Scott DeKoster, an expert in learning and development outsourcing at Korn Ferry. Those roles won’t necessarily go away, he says, but they are likely to change focus towards responsibilities that AI can’t fulfill.

One example is architecture. “It's going to take humans to architect the AI tools,” he says. There’s also implementation and governance—that is, the guardrails that ensure AI tools and systems are safe and ethical.

AI Will Enable Highly Personalized Learning Solutions

AI has the ability to infinitely customize learning experiences, in both content and format. It can adapt to match people’s individual needs and preferences at a scale and speed not previously possible.

What does that look like in practice? Vicky in accounting may learn best by following a weekly step-by-step online course, while Jordan in marketing prefers on-demand short videos to answer questions and develop skills within the flow of work.

Learning pathways can be tailored to a person’s role, assessment results, and organizational level. “Employees will have access to different types of smart content,” says DeKoster. “They can have a program curated for them.”

Research shows that today’s employees crave the chance to learn and grow. More than two-thirds (67%) of respondents to Korn Ferry’s Workforce 2024 Survey of global workers said they would stay at a job if it granted them opportunities to progress and upskill quickly, even if they hated their current role.

AI Will Supercharge Learning Engagement

Access to dynamic content delivered just in time that addresses specific needs? That’s a recipe for a more desirable and enjoyable learning experience.

“We can expect to see learning engagement go up considerably,” says DeKoster. “Imagine being taught exactly how you want to learn.”

In addition, AI-powered feedback and coaching can reinforce learning, chatbots can answer learners’ questions in real time, and automated nudges and reminders can encourage course completion and understanding. All of this improves engagement as well as talent development.

And guess what happens when job candidates hear about your organization’s engaging learning opportunities?

More than a quarter (27%) of respondents to our Workforce 2024 Survey said “excellent learning and development opportunities” was among their top five reasons to choose a new job. And 25% said it would make them stay in their role.

AI Will Optimize Learning and Cost Savings

The big bonus of all the data AI can generate, collect, and learn from is the opportunity to measure the efficacy and cost of L&D initiatives.

You’ll be able to see what learning assets get used the most, which ones generate increased performance, and which ones lead to better business outcomes. The data has the potential to be transformative.

L&D can be expensive—so it needs to work.

The cost of a poorly planned L&D approach is too high. For example, one organization of 60,000 salespeople currently spends more than $25 million annually on training, says DeKoster. “Over the last five years, it’s had a loss in revenue, loss of profitability, and loss of brand prestige. There was no measurable outcome from its learning investment.”

Organizations need to rethink their talent development strategies, and look to AI to measure their efficacy and manage their learning budget effectively. DeKoster says AI investments can lead to 20% to 30% cost savings in L&D organizations. “That’s massive,” he says.

Leadership Development

Leaders who can tap into the power of all

Learn more

Set the Stage for Artificial Intelligence in Training Now

To steer your organization through this coming sea of change, you’ll need leaders who can envision the future and who excel at change management. Leaders who will enthusiastically embrace the potential of AI for training and direct its implementation responsibly.

“It's going to take a dramatic transformation of your people who are delivering learning today,” says DeKoster. “Make sure that the organization has the right people to support that transformation.”

Given the unfamiliarity of AI tools in learning and development, it’s crucial to prepare your high-potential individuals through leadership programs. Explore our guide to learn how to cultivate strong leaders for your organization.

Featured Insights

How AI Is Revolutionizing Talent Development
Maximizing Talent Development: Common Pitfalls to Avoid
Invest in a connected coaching partner for greater impact

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

AI in the Workplace

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Kornferry2 LD

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by