Behind the Hires: Opal Greenway

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Workforce Management|May 4, 2026

Behind the Hires: Opal Greenway

Power lifter Opal Greenway shares her path from courtroom to clinic and how she translates between doctors and the C-suite.

Opal Greenway is a Senior Client Partner for Physicians Workforce Solutions at Korn Ferry.

Job Description: I solve problems for healthcare organizations and anyone who works with physicians.  I bring Korn Ferry’s full suite of expertise—strategy, compensation, operations, everything—into the physician space. We think through our doctors’ problems holistically, from hire to retire, because that’s what will actually fix physician issues in healthcare.

Professional Background: I have a law degree, but transitioned to healthcare 15 years ago. Before Korn Ferry, I led physician advisory at a healthcare consulting firm for eight years. Korn Ferry has given me the opportunity to collaborate with colleagues from every industry under the sun.

Typical Clients: I bring my expertise to many academic medical centers and urban hospitals—and because so many of our client organizations are serving rural healthcare, we are very involved in that space as well. Industry Tip: Healthcare is very late to learning what works from other industries. Now that other industries are starting to hire doctors, it’s even more important that we look outward. What are those industries’ development incentives and pay structures?

Surprising Role: I’m often brought in to referee between healthcare administrations and physicians. It’s being the Rosetta Stone: the people in the C-suite are speaking finance, and the doctors are speaking clinically. They say, “I can’t get the [doctor or CFO] to listen, can you just explain it in a way they’d understand?”

Sidekick: Moki, our 7-year-old pocket pittie. My husband and I rescue pit bulls. He’s 50lbs of pure muscle, and turns every run into a strength workout.

Ask Her About: Competitive Olympic weightlifting! My last competition was in 2019. I was a marathoner who found CrossFit, which introduced me to weightlifting, and I got into power lifting.

Unexpected Life Turn: I married my lifting coach. He’s been coaching our four-year-old, who watches us lift in the garage and has a barbell of his own.

Community Service: My mother is from the Philippines. I’m on the board of a non-profit that works to rescue street trafficked children. I help the board find corporate sponsors that give not just capital but also training, like teen reskilling programs. It dovetails with my Korn Ferry work.

When Her Law Degree Comes in Handy: Healthcare is so heavily regulated, and some regulations aren’t well known, so organizations need counsel. We have clients that don’t necessarily have those resources, especially in the private equity space. A physician may have launched a new device and is moving quickly, not realizing that there are regulatory constraints. Sometimes the reason the device doesn’t exist is because it’s largely illegal.

Teaching Side Gig: I’m a preceptor for the National Rural Health Association. I teach healthcare finance, reimbursement and the regulatory landscape for their Chief Medical Officer leader certification, as well as other leadership certifications. I also teach medical residents about contracts, so they can enter their negotiations informed.

If She Could Wave Her Magic Wand: We’d invest in real leadership and cross-technical development across the C-suite, so that the language of leadership becomes the common language. We’ve done physicians a disservice by putting them into leadership without investing in their leadership skills and development.

People Strategy & Performance

Competitive edge starts with your people.

Learn more

How We Can Help

Want to learn more about Korn Ferry's Healthcare practice? Check out our Healthcare consulting services.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Opal Greenway
Senior Partner, Health Advisory

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

People Strategy & Performance

Featured Insights

Executive Takes: Saad Ehitsham

The 5% Club

The CMOOO (or CMOO) Has Arrived

‍

‍

‍

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Workforce Management

People Strategy & Performance

Healthcare

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by