Is October Becoming the New August?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 9, 2024

Is October Becoming the New August?

Leaders are bracing for lower engagement and productivity than in the heads-down Octobers of yore.

Remember when October workplaces were speedways toward end-of-year numbers? The determination! The commitment! Employees hunkered down for a low-distraction month of boosting sales, closing deals, and planning for next year.

This October is shaping up to be a little different, with some managers saying they’re noticing less of a driving spirit. For one, fatigue rates for workers are steeply rising: Over 82% of employees are at risk of burnout, due to a mix of financial pressure (43%), exhaustion (40%), and excessive workload (37%), according to a recent trend report. At the same time, engagement figures hit an eleven-year low earlier this year, while use of sick days has grown. “People feel emotionally and energetically depleted,” says psychologist Karen Huang, director of search assessment at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, the month is not over, and many workers are pushing hard. But decades of scholarship show that employees work best under mild, mostly predictable stress. What 2024 has brought instead—everything from a string of disturbingly harsh weather to two wars to inflation—is upsetting staffers. So many stressors in such close proximity can exhaust psychic resources, says Huang. “The risk is that it drags into November and December, and becomes the way people are,” she says.

Leaders, of course, have long relied on October to kick off the last quarter of the year and ultimately provide a boost to year-end results. But they are feeling pressure too, with a presidential election looming and forcing many to delay key decisions. Experts say these circumstances have effectively applied the brakes on workforces trying to complete year-end projects. “We just have a lot of stagnation,” says Shanda Mints, vice president of RPO analytics and implementation at Korn Ferry.

Indeed, certain sectors are clearly stalled. Three-quarters of retailers, for example, say that they won’t be paying bonuses as targeted this year, meaning that they’ll be missing their numbers. Over in private equity, transaction numbers have been low for 18 months, with overall deal values clocking in at roughly 50% of 2022 figures. “October feels like the dead of the desert right now,” says Barry Toren, leader of the North American Financial Officer practice at Korn Ferry. Some firms were hiring earlier this year, but now, “no one wants to do anything until post-election,” says Toren.

Experts advise leaders to bear in mind the unusually stressful environment, and not to be surprised if employees react to it. Moving deadlines, when possible, may make sense. Earlier this year, data showed employees taking a significant amount of personal time off, a trend experts say could very well continue in a normally busy month. “I’ve noticed people who are eager to extend August into October,” says Matthew Siegel, principal at Korn Ferry.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Workforce Management capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Karen H.C. Huang, Ph.D.
Senior Director, Search Assessment, Atlanta, Miami, Northern Virginia, Washington DC,

Shanda Mints
VP, AI Strategy & Transformation

Matthew Siegel
Principal, Global Technology, Marketing Officers, Board & CEO

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

Workforce Management

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by