5 Ways to Keep Your Boss Happy

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 7, 2024

5 Ways to Keep Your Boss Happy

Most employees know it’s gotten a lot tougher to land a new job. Here’s how to work with your boss to hold on to your current role.

The recent news on job hiring, combined with tough news from Wall Street, has made it very clear to many workers: This isn’t the time to switch jobs. “There aren’t a lot of departures, so that’s a sign that the market isn’t that great, and you should do all you can to stay in your seat and do well,” says Deepali Vyas, a senior client partner and global head of the FinTech, Payments, and Crypto practice at Korn Ferry.

But staying put isn’t just a matter of keeping your head down, experts say. Now is the time to make sure you are working well with your manager, because rank-and-file employees aren’t the only ones feeling the pressure. Your boss and his boss are also under the gun in today’s market. “If there is pressure in the system, it’s important to read the room,” says Alma Derricks, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. Given these conditions, it’s important to have empathy for your boss. So how can you keep them happy?

Establish regular check-ins.

Highlight the work you’re doing, as well as the value you bring to the organization, by establishing weekly check-ins with your boss. “The more you communicate with your boss, more he will know your level of involvement and proactivity,” Vyas says. Checking in at the end of the week lets your manager know what you’ve accomplished and what you plan to work on next. If your goals don’t match your boss’s, you’ll be giving yourself time to correct them.

Anticipate your manager’s needs.

Pay attention to what’s happening outside your department to determine what might be keeping your boss up at night, Derricks says. Read trade publications and online sites that cover your industry and, if the company is publicly traded, analyst reports. “Understanding what your boss is trying to achieve, or what she is being judged on or rewarded for, allows you to better align your work to support her efforts,” says Korn Ferry Advance coach Frances Weir.

Think beyond your team.

Once you understand the challenges company leaders are facing, figure out how you can help. For instance, if a company goal is to increase revenues, can you reach out to past customers or suggest additional services to existing clients?

Show initiative.

Don’t be afraid to suggest unique ways to save money, attract new clients, or promote your company’s services. Offering new ideas and asking your boss for feedback on them shows you are engaged and proactive, Derricks says.

Keep your boss on track.

Take advantage of tools like Slack and Teams to remind your boss about any upcoming appointments or tasks that might be on her to-do list. Vyas welcomes reminders from associates to call a client or check on the status of a report. “That isn’t intrusive or annoying, and it can be super helpful,” she says.

For more expert career advice, connect with a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

Career Transition & Outplacement

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by