5 Ways to Make Hybrid Work for You

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 17, 2024

5 Ways to Make Hybrid Work for You

More than half of full-time employees are now juggling hybrid schedules with teammates and managers, adding complexity to schedules and processes.

Three years into the hybrid-work revolution, dividing work hours between home and office is the new norm in the US. According to a February study, 53% of full-time workers are now hybrid, compared to 27% remote and 21% on-site. Though hybrid workers report improved work-life balance and efficiency, their schedules come with enormous challenges. Nearly a third complained about insufficient access to equipment and resources; others griped about diminished connection to the culture, decreased collaboration, and impaired coworker relationships (particularly when it comes to coordinating schedules, tasks and timelines).

“The reality of hybrid work is more complex than meets the eye,” says supply chain expert Seth Steinberg, a Korn Ferry senior client partner. Some people work mostly from home; some are in-office frequently; some travel in from a different hometown. Each scenario presents different challenges for both the employee and their peers.

Experts say that it’s best to take hybrid work into your own hands—to personalize your strategies to best fit your needs and your team’s. You want to maximize your enjoyment of and efficiency at work, and, critically, avoid the communication and process disruptions that a fifth of employees complain about. We asked our consultants for their best advice on how to juggle hybrid weeks.

Smart in-office time begins at home.

If you’re not strategic about your at-home days, your in-office days will be wildly inefficient. Home days should emphasize two activities: Zoom meetings, and head-down, door-closed work. Radhika Papandreou, president of North America at Korn Ferry, purposely books Zoom-heavy days at home, so that she’s free to interact with coworkers at the office.

Block time to walk the halls.

Going to the office means connecting with colleagues, says Papandreou. Much of this interaction is casual, which means quite literally walking the halls and chatting—time for which you can put on your calendar. Papandreou suggests leaving your office door open, or if you’re using a cubicle, taking off your headphones to encourage interactions.

Book as many face-to-face meetings as you can.

Set meetings with local colleagues or team members, even if that means arriving early or staying on-site an extra day, says Steinberg, “so you don’t lose focus on the job at hand.” Professional relationships thrive on in-person communication, which builds stronger rapport.

Always do an office lunch date.

At the office, lunch hour isn’t just about eating—it’s about chatting with colleagues. “Lunchtime at home might be better used for a quick bite and getting in some exercise,” says organizational strategist Maria Amato, senior client partner at Korn Ferry.

Multitask on commutes.

“Stop off at the gym or make that visit to your mom or aunt’s house,” says Steinberg. Or catch a local sports team’s game in the evening. You’ll feel much better about time spent driving if your day is well-rounded.

For more expert career advice, connect with a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Seth M. Steinberg
Senior Client Partner

Radhika Papandreou
President, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

Career Transition & Outplacement

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by