5 Signs It’s Time to Change Careers

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|August 13, 2024

5 Signs It’s Time to Change Careers

A major career change goes well beyond feeling burnt-out. Experts highlight the real red flags to look for.

The idea of a job for life was always a myth of corporate America. Today, it’s not uncommon for one’s professional lifespan to feature six or seven careers. Indeed, US workers switch roles, on average, every 4.1 years, according to recent government data—nearly 50% more often than they swap their cars.

To be sure, a lot of people these days complain that they’re burnt-out and need a new career. But experts say you should consider several questions before making a switch. Are you antsy professionally because you really want a new direction, or just because you don’t like your current work environment? Will you have to learn new skills before you can get a job in another field? Will a change mean more working hours, less pay, or both? “It’s important to be clear on what is driving you to make a change. Otherwise you might find yourself seeking another career switch in six months to a year,” says Michaela Buttler, a Korn Ferry senior consultant and executive career coach.

Experts say you might want to think about a career switch if you’re experiencing some—or all—of the following symptoms:

Work, and coworkers, are completely uninteresting to you.

Only about one-third of workers describe themselves as very engaged on the job, which means most people are annoyed or bored at work—at least some of the time. However, if you that find nothing about the job engages you, including interacting with your colleagues, that’s troubling. “You should be excited about your work. We spend enough time doing it,” says Stacey Perkins, a Korn Ferry Advance career coach.

But take a moment before declaring with certainty that the job doesn’t interest you at all. It’s easy, experts say, to overlook the enjoyable aspects of a role—such as learning new skills or brainstorming with coworkers—when one or two things about it aggravate you, such as too much paperwork or an unruly boss. Being able to suss out what you do and don’t like could be the difference between switching your boss, your job, or your career.

You’re jealous.

To daydream occasionally about quitting your job and opening an inn in Vermont is one thing. To be constantly jealous of your friends’ and family members’ jobs is another. Experts say not to ignore that jealousy—it could be a sign that you need a new career. Use it to begin thinking about what you like about the roles you envy, and, more broadly, what you want out of a career. “Having a compelling vision for what you want, in addition to knowing what you don’t want, can go a long way in making a sound decision for yourself,” says Korn Ferry Advance coach Valerie Olson.

You don’t feel like you’re making an impact.

You feel like the job wastes your time and talents, and doesn’t make use of your greatest skills. Worse, you’re feeling complacent and not actively seeking out new opportunities to contribute.

Somewhere along the way, you and your career grew apart. Experts say that having these feelings regularly means it’s time to find a new role—one that plays to your strengths, provides opportunities to develop new skills, and allows you to make meaningful contributions.

Pay is becoming less important.

In a recent survey by benefits processor ADP, a majority of people worldwide cited salary as one of the most important aspects of a job. Historically, many people have put up with doing work they haven’t enjoyed because that work has come with a sizable paycheck.

However, money isn’t everything. Indeed, during the pandemic, many people discovered that the size of their paycheck mattered far less than things like meaningful work or a flexible schedule. If pay is losing importance on your own personal priority list, a career switch can become far less daunting.

You hate taking your work “home.”

The expression “taking your work home with you” has a slightly different meaning these days, with millions more people working from home (at least some of the time) than did before COVID. Plus, many demanding roles are tough to mentally “leave.” They require you to work, or at least think about them, at seemingly random times of the day.

A career can become all-consuming and distance you from your friends and family. If you find yourself in that situation, it could be a sign that you need to consider a switch.

For more expert career advice, connect with a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Michaela Buttler
Senior Consultant

Stacey Perkins
Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

Career Transition & Outplacement

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by