Financial Forecasting: Why It’s Getting Cloudy

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 29, 2026

Financial Forecasting: Why It’s Getting Cloudy

Companies are reporting earnings that are beating analysts’ estimates by a wide margin. Why isn’t financial forecasting getting more accurate?

If there’s one takeaway from first-quarter earnings so far, it’s that AI hasn’t made financial forecasting any more accurate.

Heading into this week, 84% of S&P 500 companies reporting earnings beat analyst expectations, and by a wide margin. According to financial-data firm FactSet, companies’ reported earnings are, in the aggregate, 12.3% above estimates, which is five percentage points higher than both the five- and 10-year averages. The margin of inaccuracy—against the backdrop of the SEC’s potential move to reduce earnings reporting from quarterly to twice annually—holds significant implications for investors, in terms of both financial transparency and the ability to gauge company performance. “The differences are huge,” says Peter McDermott, a senior client partner in the Global Corporate Affairs and Investor Relations practice at Korn Ferry.

Estimates are no more than that, of course, and a certain margin of error is to be expected. But the size of the “upside surprises,” as earnings beats are known in industry parlance, goes beyond firms simply underpromising and overdelivering, because these surprises, over time, can affect a company’s ability to maintain strong investor relations. To be sure, given the speed at which current world events are shifting, “analysts likely baked conservatism on the part of firms into their estimates already,” says McDermott.

To derive their estimates, analysts rely on various factors, among them an organization’s historic financial performance, management comments, and industry and market trends—all of them metrics AI is supposed to be better at evaluating and modeling than humans are. But the current economic and market volatility “makes it harder for analysts to forecast, even with AI and richer data,” says Chad Astmann, co-head of global investment management at Korn Ferry. Astmann says some forecast misses are hard to predict because they aren’t based on historical models, such as companies reporting changes in the cost structure over the course of the quarter, onetime items, expense timing, and so forth.

Additionally, fewer companies are providing financial guidance in advance. Since the pandemic, the number of firms issuing guidance has steadily declined, even as uncertainty and volatility have increased. Currently, only about 20% of S&P 500 firms issue guidance; during the early 2000s, about 50% did. If firms move to a biannual reporting schedule—which could disadvantage retail and individual investors who rely on signals from the media and analysts to make investment decisions—that figure could fall even further.

Even if analysts are using the most sophisticated AI and financial-modeling tools, their predictions are only as good as the data they are based on, says McDermott. Put another way, in order for AI to help analysts make better predictions, it has to be trained more deeply on the businesses it is evaluating. “AI is definitely not there yet when it comes to cracking the code with equity research,” he says. Astmann agrees, but says it’s only a matter of time. “The mastery of AI usage will improve, and new practices will make their way into financial modeling to sharpen analysis at a rapid clip,” he says. “It’s just early.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Peter McDermott
Senior Client Partner, Global Corporate Affairs and Investor Relations

Chad Astmann
Co-Head of Global Investment Management

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by