Raising the Hiring Bar

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 1, 2024

Raising the Hiring Bar

After lowering qualifications during the post-pandemic hiring craze, firms are raising them again to cope with the deluge of AI-generated résumés. But could it backfire?

AI is making it harder for people to get jobs—but not for the reason you might think.

After dropping or lowering requirements for job seekers during the post-pandemic hiring craze, firms are getting stricter about screening candidates. According to a new survey, nearly three-fourths of leaders and hiring managers say they are raising qualifications and experience minimums for open positions, and 59% expect this trend to continue over the next year. Potential changes include things like requiring licensing or accreditation in specific skills or technologies, increasing the number of years and level of experience for roles, mandating industry-specific experience, and more.

The changes, experts say, have little to do with reduced hiring needs or the tight labor market. Instead, they’re meant to help contend with the deluge of AI-generated résumés firms are receiving. “There are a lot more people applying for open positions, which gives companies an opportunity to raise their hiring bar,” says Jason Burt, vice president of global talent acquisition at Korn Ferry.

But some experts worry this might not be the best way to winnow down the talent pool. Paul Fogel, sector leader of professional search for Korn Ferry’s Software practice, says AI platforms people use for résumés will simply mimic the new credentials listed in the posting. “Raising requirements isn’t going to stop people from using AI to apply for jobs,” he says. In fact, despite 89% of leaders in the survey saying AI will make their hiring process more efficient, many experts say it could inadvertently screen out the best candidates. “Companies may make it more complicated to find the right people,” says David Vied, global sector leader for the Medical Devices and Diagnostics practice at Korn Ferry.

Certainly, firms know the current job hiring system is seriously flawed, with too many candidates and filtering systems that are less than ideal. The average job posting now draws about 250 résumés, with some prime positions getting thousands within a few days. At the same time, applicants have gotten savvier about loading their résumés with keywords and language designed to get past AI-powered filtering systems. According to the survey, application volume is up 31% so far this year. This has allowed companies to raise qualifications “to home in on specific skills,” says Wayne Mealey, vice president of client services at Korn Ferry. It’s the inverse of what happened during the post-COVID boom, when firms decreased requirements to widen talent pools.

Mealey says the more stringent requirements are an evolution of, rather than a retreat from, the trend toward skills-based hiring. To be sure, the percentage of job postings that mandate educational requirements like a college degree—another remnant of the post-pandemic need for talent—is still on the decline. “There’s been a reversal in allowing flexibilities to attract talent,” says Mealey, “but it’s because a skills-based hiring strategy is the best way to find the best talent.”

For job seekers, of course, the change couldn’t come at a tougher time. The number of job openings has fallen, and firms have moved away from many traditional white-collar roles in favor of investing in AI. Now, many candidates will encounter yet another hurdle in their quest to find work. From hiring managers ghosting candidates and scam job postings to return-to-office mandates and increased competition, the average time it takes to land a job has doubled from three to six months in recent years, with some white-collar workers searching a year or even longer for a new role.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Jason Burt

Vice President, Global Talent Acquisition

Wayne Mealey

Vice President, Client Services

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by