Essentials: How to Find a New Role in 2024

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 2, 2024

Essentials: How to Find a New Role in 2024

The competition has never been stiffer, and technology might be working against you—but Korn Ferry’s experts have got tips and techniques to get you in the door and help you ace the interview.

It’s one thing to learn about how frustrating the job market is; it’s quite another to experience it as a job seeker. With some roles getting 250 or more applicants, the process can be daunting.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry’s recruiters and career coaches share their best tips about how to get your résumé in front of the right people at the right time, how to ace interviews, and more. Increasingly, looking for a new job involves looking internally at your current workplace.

The Frenzy to Find Work

The current job market has become hugely frustrating—for candidates and companies alike. How did it get this way, and where do we go from here?

‘Unretiring’ to Work

A new study shows retirees returning to the office is no longer just a trend but rather a permanent feature of the new world of work. How are leaders and other employees reacting?

Hiring that’s Laser-Like—and Frustrating

The latest jobs data gives the impression that hiring is robust. The reality: a “near-recession” for white-collar and other positions.

Telling a Firm, and Everyone Else, You Want Its Job

Frustrated by a frenzied job market, some candidates are making naked appeals for roles in social-media posts. Will it help or hurt them?

Skills Grab

Facing uncertain times, firms are desperate to build up worker skills—or buy them.

The ‘Rage Applying’ Problem

Companies are being inundated with résumés from workers who are frustrated but aren’t serious about switching roles. What can hiring professionals do?

Click out all the stories in The 2024 Essentials (Midyear Version).

Featured Insights

Essentials: AI’s Not-Quite Takeover
Essentials: The Evolving Office Life
Essentials: The UGH! Job Market
Essentials: Briefings Podcast

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment

Career Advice