Essentials: The UGH! Job Market

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|July 1, 2024

Essentials: The UGH! Job Market

Why is a market with low unemployment and a high number of job openings making no one happy?

It may be the story of the year: The job market has become a major source of frustration, both for those looking and hiring. According to recent surveys, almost half of job seekers say the process has burned them out, while 90% of employers say they aren’t finding the people they need. Those stats don’t seem to make sense in an era of low unemployment and more than 8 million job openings, a higher number than ever seen pre-pandemic.

In this Essentials, Korn Ferry takes a look at the phenomenon that’s profoundly shaping the job market.

The Frenzy to Find Work

The current job market has become hugely frustrating—for candidates and companies alike. How did it get this way, and where do we go from here?

‘Unretiring’ to Work

A new study shows retirees returning to the office is no longer just a trend but rather a permanent feature of the new world of work. How are leaders and other employees reacting?

Hiring that’s Laser-Like—and Frustrating

The latest jobs data gives the impression that hiring is robust. The reality: a “near-recession” for white-collar and other positions.

Telling a Firm, and Everyone Else, You Want Its Job

Frustrated by a frenzied job market, some candidates are making naked appeals for roles in social-media posts. Will it help or hurt them?

Skills Grab

Facing uncertain times, firms are desperate to build up worker skills—or buy them.

The ‘Rage Applying’ Problem

Companies are being inundated with résumés from workers who are frustrated but aren’t serious about switching roles. What can hiring professionals do?

Click out all the stories in The 2024 Essentials (Midyear Version).

Featured Insights

Essentials: AI’s Not-Quite Takeover
Essentials: How to Find a New Role in 2024
Essentials: The Evolving Office Life
Essentials: Briefings Podcast

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Future of Work

Talent Recruitment