Eyes On You: Tracking of Remote Workers Grows

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 15, 2024

Eyes On You: Tracking of Remote Workers Grows

Seven in ten firms now electronically track workers. Why has trust eroded?

Of all the changes to work in recent years, there’s one that firms are happy to keep in place—electronic monitoring.

Originally conceived to deal with the pandemic and lockdowns, digital monitoring of employees by firms is continuing—and in many cases increasing. According to one recent study, 71% of employees are subject to some form of corporate surveillance, up from less than one-third before the remote-work era took off. Trends like quiet quitting, bare-minimum Mondays, and afternoon spikes in TV-viewership data have “touched a nerve with employers,” says Mark Royal, a senior client partner for Korn Ferry Advisory who specializes in employee engagement. In the absence of in-person oversight, he says, managers are resorting to time- and activity-tracking tools, screen monitoring, and AI-based approaches.

To be sure, experts say that the companies that are demanding employees return to the office are often the same companies that are stepping up remotely monitoring them. Think of it as the corporate version of the party game Would You Rather, with firms subtly pressuring employees to choose between coming back to the office or enduring more pervasive surveillance at home. “The more people return to the office, the lower the volume on monitoring,” says Jonathan Wildman, a senior client partner with Korn Ferry Advisory.

Tamara Rodman, a senior client partner in the Culture, Change, and Communications practice at Korn Ferry, says surveillance of employees, which formerly was focused on protecting corporate devices from data breaches and cybersecurity threats, has morphed into something much more cynical. “Monitoring now is more about watching what people are doing and making sure they are working,” she says. That’s led to a historic and worrisome level of mistrust between employers and employees, Rodman says. Surveys show that one-fourth of US professionals don’t believe their employer trusts them, and only 67% trust their employers, a decline of 3% since 2022.

More monitoring may lead to more problems, says Royal. For one, he notes that studies show that monitoring increases stress and anxiety and only minimally contributes to productivity. “If monitoring is not really helping, why are companies increasingly doing it?” he asks.

The key, says Rodman, is for firms to better communicate to staffs what they are doing. Most employees continue to be unaware of monitoring, or how the data that’s tracking them is being used. But she also feels that monitoring could lead to higher levels of attrition among talent that values flexibility and autonomy. Pointing to Korn Ferry data showing that employees cite flexibility in work hours among their top considerations for choosing and staying in a job, Rodman says leaders and managers “need to shift their mindset to focus on outcomes instead of activity.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Jonathan Wildman
North America, Life Science Consulting Leader

Tamara Rodman
Senior Client Partner, Culture, Change & Communications

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

Organization Strategy

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by