Natural Disasters: The Toll on Employees

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|October 1, 2024

Natural Disasters: The Toll on Employees

Millions of employees may need to push the limits of compensation and benefits packages following Hurricane Helene, which is expected to cost up to $8 billion in labor and production losses.

After Hurricane Helene hit last weekend, managers slowly began hearing from their employees, some of whom used dying phone batteries to report homes under water. The message from nearly every manager was the same: Take care of your family and yourself first.

But alongside the historic storm’s human tragedy and property damage, firms are trying to find ways to deal with widespread disruptions to their employee base in the hurricane’s path from Florida to North Carolina. And the magnitude of these disruptions is considerable: Estimates place lost labor and production costs at $5 billion to $8 billion, according to Moody’s. In some cases, whole regions are expected to be out of commission for extended periods.

Whether it’s hurricanes, earthquakes, or forest fires, the world is now experiencing about 400 natural disasters a year, according to the International Monetary Fund—twice as many as it did a generation ago. Wherever these events occur, well-meaning managers often want to offer tangible help immediately, but next steps are often “complicated,” says Steve Kapper, head of the National Health and Welfare Benefits practice at Korn Ferry. Extreme weather can prompt a flood of complicated compensation claims whose outcomes can depend on an employee’s status—exempt or non-exempt, fixed-salaried or not—and possible workplace closures, among many other variables. On the corporate side, most benefits and compensation packages were not designed with natural disasters in mind, and so the rules can be anything but intuitive.

In the immediate aftermath, of course, work is not the priority and smart leaders are showing this. “The first thing is knowing where your people are and that they’re safe,” says Ron Seifert, leader of the North America Workforce Reward and Benefits practice at Korn Ferry. Leaders in this situation take their cues from the military, which specializes in rolling out solutions following crises. Safety and security come first. Are people safe, and are their basic needs being met? The organization should reach out to everyone affected. “It should be aggressive contacting and communication,” says JP Sniffen, practice leader of the Military Center of Expertise at Korn Ferry. If possible, boots are on the ground. “You want someone there observing, versus watching on TV and telling people what to do,” he says.

Only then is it time to assess when work might begin again, and even then, expectations have to be tempered. The question managers should ask themselves, says Seifert, is what employees can do, based on the environment and prevailing conditions. Managers should be tasked with empowering them, to the degree this is possible, he says.

The capabilities of one employee category or level may differ sharply from those of others. Experts advise setting the baseline with sensitivity to the needs of lower-level employees. “Otherwise, efforts to help will just further the divide between employer and employee,” says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics at Korn Ferry.

In the interim, experts say, managers can’t go wrong if they connect employees with available benefits programs and advise them of creative applications of those programs, such as using an Employee Assistance Program to help with the mental-health impact of living in a disaster zone. “Make sure they know what programs they have access to,” says Seifert.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Workforce Management capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Steve Kapper
Associate Client Partner

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

JP Sniffen
Practice Leader, Military COE & Physical Security

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Career Advice

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Career Transition & Outplacement

Organization Design & Analytics

Workforce Transformation

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by