Purpose and Power

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 13, 2024

Purpose and Power

Best-selling author Dan Goleman shares what business leaders can learn from community organizers.

Daniel Goleman is author of the international best-seller Emotional Intelligence and of the forthcoming Optimal: How to Sustain Personal and Organizational Excellence Every Day. He is a regular contributor to Korn Ferry.

Marshall Ganz, a celebrated senior lecturer at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, defines leadership as “accepting responsibility for enabling others to achieve shared purpose in the face of uncertainty.” Ganz, who cut his teeth as an organizer in the Civil Rights Movement, says organizing is a distinct form of leadership that “enables people to turn the resources they have into the power they need to make the change they want.”

According to Ganz and his colleagues, organizing has five key leadership practices:

Telling Stories: Articulating a story of why we are called to lead, the community we seek to mobilize, and why we are compelled to act.
Building Relationships: Creating and growing networks of relationships that fuel collective action.
Structuring Teams: Creating a structure that distributes responsibility among a diverse group of stakeholders.
Strategizing: Collecting resources and turning them into the tools needed to achieve a clear set of goals.
Acting: Translating all of this into actions that motivate individuals and groups as they aim to be as effective as possible.

It’s perhaps surprising how this applies to business leadership. These points mirror what purpose-driven leaders do in more traditional organizations: The first three practices build the power needed to produce movement on something that matters, and the last two utilize that power in order to urge on a meaningful change or vision.

For organizers, power is not viewed as a trait that follows a single person or position. Instead, it’s described as the influence that is built when individuals, networks, and organizations come together and commit to an exchange of interests and resources.

This is something purpose-driven leaders can look to in their own work: not just how they assume a sense of power within their own role, but how they can build power among networks of potential collaborators in order to push for something beyond traditional metrics of success.

Meanwhile, Ganz has often said that organizing, this practice of gathering groups of people together to advocate for a shared purpose, is rooted in three age-old questions:

If I am not for myself, who am I?

When I am only for myself, what am I?

And if not now, when?

These might be the same questions the purpose-driven leader or organization will want to ask themselves.

Co-written by Elizabeth Solomon

Click here to learn more about Daniel Goleman's Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Daniel Goleman
Contributor, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

People Strategy & Performance

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by