Sleeping on the Job, Literally

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 10, 2024

Sleeping on the Job, Literally

One-third of employees take at least one nap during the workday every week. What the trend signals to employers.

As a junior associate at a prestigious law firm in New York, Jeremy worked long hours. He knew being seen at the office by the senior partners was important, so he went in early, stayed late, and often ate lunch at his desk. But a few afternoons a week, he would block out time on his calendar, walk down to Central Park, find a shady spot under a tree, and take a nap.

Across America, workers are sneaking shut-eye into the workday, napping in cars, parks, and (for those at home) on couches and beds. A new survey by wellness company Sleep Doctor found that one-third of employees take at least one nap per week during work hours. Most take power naps, sleeping for less than 30 minutes, but 24% admitted to sleeping for an hour or longer. Remote workers nap longer and more often.

The practice isn’t entirely new, of course, but experts say the prevalence of napping today may underscore workers’ levels of stress and burnout. For leaders, it’s another management challenge on top of slowing productivity, low engagement, and workers cutting out early, among others. “When people are sleeping on the job, they are sending a signal,” says Mark Royal, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in employee engagement. “It’s up to leaders to figure out what sort of signal.” Royal notes that napping doesn’t necessarily convey disengagement. “Not everyone is fully engaged and staying on task all day, every day,” he says. “Napping could also be a signal of a need to refresh.”

The science on the connection between sleep and performance is well established. Short naps of 30 minutes or less have been shown to reduce stress, increase energy, improve focus, and more. From a corporate perspective, sleeping on the job has gone from a habit associated with slouches to one practiced by high performers. Industries like aviation (which is required by law to provide employees with rest) and technology (which has made nap rooms an office perk) have embraced on-the-job sleeping as a way of avoiding fatigue and enhancing performance.

“If napping is occurring during a natural break, it doesn’t have to be a bad thing,” says Ron Porter, a senior client partner in the Global Human Resources Center of Excellence at Korn Ferry. “Instead of a shot of caffeine, some people can reenergize with a nap.” To be sure, 62% of workers cited the need to reenergize as their top reason for taking a nap during work, followed by a poor night’s sleep (owing in part to job-related anxieties), long hours, and stress.

Greg Button, president of global healthcare services at Korn Ferry, says the data on napping is a symptom of the merging of work and life. People are organizing their days in atypical ways, and working and sleeping unusual hours. Others are making health and wellness a priority, and carving out more time for rest and relaxation, whether via meditation apps, quiet rooms, or midafternoon naps. “Companies, especially healthcare companies, are thinking hard about how to create space for employees to rest,” says Button.

Not everyone napping during the workday is a high performer, however. According to the study, 17% of employees say they sleep on the job out of boredom or to avoid work. Tamara Rodman, a senior client partner in the Culture, Change, and Communications practice at Korn Ferry, draws a line between napping at work and quiet quitting. “It ties into this general malaise many workers are experiencing,” she says.

For managers, the challenge is to distinguish between the high performer who’s recharging and the quiet quitter who’s slacking off. Under the circumstances, it might be tempting to increase surveillance of remote workers, but experts say that would be counterproductive. Accountability and trust are critical. “Napping to recharge can’t be a benefit absent accountability,” says Button.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Total Rewards capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

Ronald Porter
Senior Partner

Greg Button
President, Global Healthcare Services

Tamara Rodman
Senior Client Partner, Culture, Change & Communications

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Business Impact

Employee Experience

Workforce Management

Talent Acquisition

Professional Search

Organization Strategy

Cultural Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by