5 Traits CEOs and Astronauts (Yes, Astronauts) Share

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|March 25, 2024

5 Traits CEOs and Astronauts (Yes, Astronauts) Share

Job openings may be rising, but a new survey finds half of job seekers say they’re “completely burned out.” What’s causing all this?

The boardroom isn’t exactly the final frontier. But getting there requires many of the same leadership qualities landing on Mars does. Or so it might seem.

Which brings us to a news item that’s picking up some attention: NASA is recruiting its next class of astronauts. It’s true that both business leaders and astronauts need—to quote the famous movie—the “Right Stuff.” But what exactly is that, and what do business and the moonshot world share? “The traits and mindsets are quite similar,” says Kevin Cashman, global co-leader of CEO and enterprise leader development at Korn Ferry.

To be sure, the bravery required to go to space, with its life-threatening risks, is on a whole different level. But NASA’s efforts to break the old archetypes mirror a similar post-pandemic leadership transition in the corporate world. What’s still essential for space travel are technical and scientific expertise, physical capabilities, and education and training. Yet leadership traits and drivers have evolved since the last time NASA put out a call for astronaut candidates (coincidentally, in the pandemic year of 2020). Such traits as teamwork, social skills, and emotional intelligence are being called out alongside spacewalking and robotics skills.

Here are a few other leadership traits our experts say are as relevant for astronauts in deep space as they are for CEOs here on Earth.

They have a vision for the mission.

For both astronauts and business leaders, it’s critical to have a clear sense of what you are trying to achieve, how you are going to achieve it, and what role others can play, says Dennis Baltzley, global head of leadership development solutions at Korn Ferry. A vision for the mission combines a deep belief in one’s personal leadership with an “unquestioning trust in the ability of the team” to achieve it.

They have a shared purpose.

While a certain amount of self-determination and relentlessness is required to make it to the top of any profession, leaders today also recognize the importance of a collaborative mindset and shared purpose. Astronauts and CEOs have to be dedicated team players and believe deeply in the mission, say experts.

They’re adaptable in the face of uncertainty.

Astronauts are literally going into the unknown, so they have to be prepared for anything. Over the last few years, the business environment hasn’t been any more certain. “When conditions are constantly changing, leaders have to be able to constantly adapt,” says Tamara Rodman, a senior client partner in the Culture, Change, and Communications practice at Korn Ferry.

They have a drive for innovation.

Whether it’s the desire to explore new planets or develop a new product, both astronauts and business leaders share an innovation mindset, say experts. They look at an issue from all angles; they test and experiment with different solutions. That kind of open-mindedness and curiosity is atypical for most leaders, which is why many firms struggle with innovation.

They have courage under fire.

Nothing ever goes according to plan—in space or in business. The ability of leaders to manage risk and make decisions under pressure is more critical today than ever before, says Alma Derricks, a senior client partner in the Culture, Change, and Communications practice at Korn Ferry. “Staying calm and poised in stressful situations or in the face of failure is what separates successful leaders from the rest,” she says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kevin Cashman
Vice Chairman, CEO & Enterprise Leadership

Dennis R. Baltzley, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, Global Head of Leadership Development Solutions

Tamara Rodman
Senior Client Partner, Culture, Change & Communications

David Napeloni
Vice President, Client Services, Life Sciences

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by