Return to Office: Big at Small Firms?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 24, 2024

Return to Office: Big at Small Firms?

New data shows that smaller firms are three times more likely than large to require people to be in the office. Do they have a culture edge that persuades workers?

If you’re a leader who really wants your employees at the office full-time, there may be a new solution: Join a small firm.

According to new data, firms with fewer than 5,000 employees are nearly three times as likely to require full-time attendance from their workers as firms with more than 25,000 employees. In all, 23% of smaller firms require full-time office work, while only 8% of the largest firms do. Experts say the figures suggest smaller firms can create such requirements because their return-to-office efforts—unlike those of larger firms—appear to be succeeding.

In particular, experts say, the figures suggest smaller firms do a better job of establishing a sense of common purpose among their employees. The tighter the group, of course, the more people are incentivized to endure commutes and other costs associated with going into the office. “Culture-building in smaller firms is more crucial to driving colleague engagement than it is in larger firms,” says Brian Bloom, Korn Ferry’s vice president for global benefits and mobility operations.

The data reflects the latest challenge big firms are facing, at least in terms of creating cultures that draw people to the office. At smaller organizations, people often take on multiple roles, says Anu Gupta, a Korn Ferry senior client partner specializing in corporate and business unit strategy. “Good teamwork and communication are not only essential to the growth of the organization, but also, in many cases, to its survival,” he says. Multiple post-pandemic studies indicate that teams workmore cohesively and effectively in the office than they do remotely.

Indeed, small-company culture often embraces an entrepreneurial, “act like an owner” mentality, says Dan Kaplan, Korn Ferry senior client partner in the firm’s Chief Human Resources Officers practice. “That doesn’t exist at a lot of large firms.”

The largest firms might require the least amount of full-time office work, but they are also more likely to have a structured schedule for hybrid employees. Indeed, 75% have established specific expectations around factors like days- and hours-per-week minimums and specific in-office days. By contrast, only 46% of the smallest firms have a structured-hybrid setup.

The data comes from an index produced by work-management-software firm Scoop, which reviewed headquarters-office requirements for 7,500 companies in 50,000 US office locations. The survey found that the average expected in-office work time for corporate workers is 2.5 days per week. About 18% of organizations—regardless of size—require full-time in-office work.

The most flexible industry was technology, in which 49% of firms grant employees full discretion in deciding whether or not to work at the office. Among insurance companies, which ranked second, the prevalence of flexibility was significantly more limited, at 34%. Experts attribute tech’s relatively flexible approach to the fact that most of its organizations aren’t situated in manufacturing centers. In addition, tech-industry employees are often in high demand, meaning that many firms may have to offer flexible scheduling to attract and retain top talent.

The least flexible industry was restaurants and food services, fully half of which mandate full-time in-office attendance for corporate employees. Generally, employees working with food can’t effectively perform their job unless they’re on-site at their restaurant, farm, or processing facility. Letting corporate employees in other industries work most of their time remotely might look unfair.

Regardless of a company’s size, experts say, any RTO mandate will go much more smoothly if leaders clearly explain its underlying rationale. Kaplan said he appreciated the frankness of one investment-firm boss, who acknowledged to his employees that commuting wasn’t ideal, but that they had to return to the office because the company owned billions in commercial real-estate assets. A firm that owns office buildings deploying a fully remote workforce would be a terrible look. “There was candor,” Kaplan says.

Many employees might grouse about it, but they’ll return to the office if they feel they’re getting something out of the experience, experts say. In one study, 85% of employees said they’d be motivated to return to the office to rebuild team bonds. Other incentives they cited include in-person training, better feedback, and career-development opportunities.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organizational Transforrmation capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Brian Bloom
Senior Vice President, Global Benefits & Mobility Operations

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Anu Gupta
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by