The Complex Shift Away from Plastic Packing

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 26, 2024

The Complex Shift Away from Plastic Packing

Shippers are moving away from decades-old practices to address a key environmental issue, but it is a difficult process.

In corporate land, the front line of consumer environmentalism is packaging: 22 billion packages, mostly retail and commercial, were mailed in the US last year. Most of those packages—hopefully—included padding to protect their contents, often in the form of those little air-filled plastic pillows, which most recipients toss in the trash.

That is about to change. This year you will increasingly see fewer plastic pillows inside many shipped packages, as one of the nation’s largest retailers shifts to paper pillows. This will remove nearly 15 billion plastic pillows from the shipping ecosystem annually. “This is a pretty major operation,” says John Long, North America retail sector leader at Korn Ferry. Other manufacturers, wholesalers, distribution centers, and retailers are making similar upgrades, says Kate Shattuck, co-leader of the Impact Investing practice at Korn Ferry—though often quietly.

“Companies with fewer zeros aren’t going to garner headlines, but this is happening all over,” she says. Still, switching from plastic to paper is a risk for companies, which are already scrambling to expand their volume, with some projections expecting US packages to jump by 25% to 30% in the next four years, to 30 billion-plus. And any such change can disrupt factory lines and slow the movement of goods. “Slowing down the line costs a ton of money,” says Jorge Gomar, senior client partner in the Global Industrial Market practice at Korn Ferry. The differentiator, he explains, is the need to develop new technology; for decades, many companies have chosen machines that dispensed plastic.

Making the leap from plastic to paper pillows is more complicated than one would think, and requires the building of a new supply chain. Paper is a mix of softwood and hardwood, and trees for the latter can take two decades or more to mature. “It’s a very complex supply chain,” says Gomar. Twenty years ago, when environmentalists foresaw the coming surge in retail shipping, there wasn’t enough paper available.

Paper supply chains are doubly complex (and confusing) because recycling sits at both the beginning and the terminus of the supply chain. On one end, firms can use recycled materials to make the paper; on the other, paper products can be recycled. Two decades ago, options for paper packaging were insufficient at both ends of the chain. Recycling at the time was very expensive, says Gomar. These days, commercial recyclers can supply more of the chain.

For companies, these shifts to more environmentally friendly packaging are also a way to commit to firms' standards as citizens of a broader ecosystem and planet, which ultimately strengthens ties with stakeholders, employees, and customers alike. "They are living out their values," says Sidney Cooke, senior client partner in the CEO succession and coaching practices at Korn Ferry.

What's more, the uneasy marketplace is providing a post-pandemic catalyst for change. “There’s climate change, droughts, fires, and supply-chain disruptions—it’s easier said than done,” says Gomar. Wood prices tripled, then quintupled; they’re now double what they were before the pandemic. For most retailers and shippers, the economy is either soft or complex (or both), leading firms to pay close attention to details like packaging. “Smart organizations are looking for any advantage right now,” says Shattuck—ranging from customer approval to sustainability. “Everyone thinks ESG is dead, and it’s not.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Kate Shattuck
Managing Partner, Korn Ferry

Jorge Gomar
Senior Client Partner

Sidney Cooke
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

People Strategy & Performance

Organization Strategy

Change Management

Kornferry7 TR

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by