6 Tips for More Productive Fridays

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|May 1, 2024

6 Tips for More Productive Fridays

Friday office attendance is way down, but ambitious workers see it as a “slow day” they can use to get ahead.

Most people, it seems, don’t want to work much on Fridays. Many of us look for any excuse to log off as quickly as possible without angering the boss. When we work on Fridays, we are often sloppy. A recent study from Texas A&M University found that workers are far less productive on Friday afternoons, and make many more typos, than on any other workday.

On the other hand, experts say, the right mindset can turn Friday into the most important day of the week for advancing your career. As the workday that typically features the fewest meetings, Friday can offer you undistracted time to brainstorm, plow through assignments, and other productive work. Here are six steps our experts suggest for maximizing your Friday productivity:

On Monday, set clear ideas about what will make for a productive week.

Figuring out how to make Friday productive actually starts four days earlier. Start the week by writing down what tasks you need to accomplish by the end of the week. Be specific. Consider sharing the list with colleagues or your supervisor to hold yourself accountable. This adviser can also advise you on whether your list is too ambitious, or not ambitious enough.

At the end of each day, check off what you’ve completed. Dedicate yourself to wrapping up—by Friday—everything on the list that’s unchecked. You find that you’ve either freed yourself to use Friday for other projects, or that you have the whole day to knock off the last open tasks.

Let tech help.

“Technology was supposed to create a world where people work less and enjoy more leisure, yet for most people, it has just created more work,” says Korn Ferry Advance career and leadership coach Val Olson. But technology can in fact help you take control of your Friday productivity. Indeed, a simple calendar tool is one of the most effective ways to manage your time. Using a calendar program or project-management tool, mark off time on Friday to devote to completing tasks—as well as buffers, just in case some tasks run long.

This style of working, called “batching,” can make it easier to avoid daydreaming or being distracted by other projects, both of which can be Friday productivity killers.

Make Friday the “low-stress” work day.

Filing expense reports. Adding up billable hours. Reviewing or updating weekly reports. Most jobs involve unglamorous work that doesn’t require creative thinking, but still has to be done.

Devoting a block of Friday to so-called “work admin” time allows you to knock out essential tasks so they don’t hang over you the following week.

Turn Friday into “Training Day.”

Want to learn a new programming language? Need to complete a certification course for work? Carve out time on Fridays for career growth. Many people take off early on Fridays, particularly in the summer, which potentially means fewer distractions in the office. “Assuming you have no weekend plans, Fridays are sometimes the best times to get in professional development and training,” says Sharon Egilinsky, a partner in Korn Ferry’s Organizational Strategy practice.

Arrange informal small meetings.

Under names such as “Flow Friday,” some companies are banning non-essential Friday meetings. Many bosses have figured out that no one (themselves included) likes to sit through a major meeting at the end of the workweek.

But that doesn’t mean you can’t use Friday for one-on-one get-togethers with colleagues you might not speak with frequently. Discussing important work topics with a variety of people can improve your organizational awareness—a key trait of emotional intelligence. You might discover ways you can help to make your colleague’s work life easier, or vice versa. These informal chats are also a great time to network and ask for career advice.

Start a little earlier.

Beginning work earlier on Friday morning is an acknowledgement that your energy might be waning by Friday afternoon. You can maximize it by starting work an hour or two earlier on Friday.

You might even be able to stipulate this arrangement officially with your boss, says Mark Royal, senior client partner at Korn Ferry Advisory. Deliver superior performance during the week, including Friday mornings, and you’ll get to take off Friday afternoon for errands or nonwork appointments, or to start the weekend.

For more career advice, connect with a career coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Mark Royal, Ph.D.
Senior Client Partner, North America

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by