Not Just a ‘Cog in the Machine’

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 15, 2024

Not Just a ‘Cog in the Machine’

Employees increasingly want to be valued for who they are, not just for the work they do, argues best-selling author Dan Goleman.

Daniel Goleman is author of the international best-seller Emotional Intelligence and of the forthcoming Optimal: How to Sustain Personal and Organizational Excellence Every Day. He is a regular contributor to Korn Ferry.

According to recent research, employees aren’t just looking for a sense of purpose at work, they are depending on it. A whopping 70% say their work defines their sense of purpose.

This signifies a major shift in the mandate of business. Whereas purpose was once relegated to people’s personal lives—their families, hobbies, and religious communities—there is now a growing expectation that our jobs are the place to actualize our values and connect with a sense of meaning.

This new way of seeing work is influenced by a myriad of things. We could talk about the declining role of religion in the Western world, the burgeoning awareness of global warming, the COVID-19 pandemic, or even the way technology has spawned a culture of isolation alongside unlimited access to global stories of suffering.

But in the context of work, it’s important to look at another conversation—the one around employees’ growing need to be seen as whole people in the workplace. According to one study, 82% of employees say it’s important to be seen by their organization as a person, not just a worker, and only 45% believe their company actually sees them this way.

Succinctly put, the “cog in the machine” culture spawned by the industrial revolution is fading. Modern workers want to be acknowledged for their full range of talents, identities, and passions—not just for what they produce, but for who they are. Just about every workplace trend over the past four years—from the Great Resignation to quiet quitting—can be linked to this request: “Value me for all I bring, and acknowledge me for all that I am.”

When it comes to employee engagement, purpose goes almost hand in hand with being seen as a whole person. One study found that top employers (as measured by their level of employee satisfaction and their appeal to emerging talent) tend to have lower carbon emissions and more diversity, and make a greater effort to understand employee feelings. In other words, they aren’t just showing up for the environment; they are showing up for the very people they employ.

One model that feels especially relevant to the conversation is Dr. Carol Ryff’s multidimensional model of well-being. A psychologist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Ryff was among the first to disentangle well-being from happiness and look at what makes for a well-lived life.

Self-Acceptance: The importance of understanding our strengths, weaknesses, and personal vision with a positive mindset so we can refrain from judging ourselves and welcome ourselves as we are.
Positive Relations with Others: Growing our capacity to understand and accept others and their perspectives. When we extend that acceptance, with empathy and caring, we can achieve the rich personal connections we long for.
Autonomy:Resisting social pressures and acting in accordance with our personal values—the ultimate expression of being whole and embracing our uniqueness as people.
Environmental Mastery: Allowing our values to determine how we engage with the world, including understanding and utilizing opportunities—and seeking situations—that fit with our own beliefs and principles.
Purpose in Life: Going the next step and intentionally directing our vision to pursue more meaningful goals that enable us to look forward to our future.
Personal Growth: Seeking new challenges and remaining open to new experiences so we can cultivate a growth mindset and a view of ourselves and the world as having the capacity to develop and improve.

Within this model, we see the foundations of everything employees are asking for, from purpose to being taken for all of who they are. As more and more workers seek jobs that prioritize mutual value, the “cog in the machine” culture will dissipate even further. Of course, this doesn’t mean that money doesn’t matter—it only means that money isn’t always enough. The modern employee wants meaning, equity, and a sense of agency. They want organizations that care about what they value and make room for how they feel about the work.

Co-written by Elizabeth Solomon

Click here to learn more about Daniel Goleman's Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Daniel Goleman
Contributor, Korn Ferry Institute

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

People Strategy & Performance

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by