Is AI Coming for the CEO?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 24, 2024

Is AI Coming for the CEO?

Nearly half of bosses think so, according to recent surveys. Should they be worried?

To some executives, an AI-generated “digital twin” sounds ideal. This twin—a concept proposed by a major video-software company this month—could sit in on video meetings, synthesize notes, send out emails, and file expenses, along with other essential but relatively mundane tasks, leaving the human boss with time to negotiate deals, meet investors, and carry out other work best accomplished, at least for now, person-to-person.

But behind that glorious-sounding idea is a growing feeling that even CEOs aren’t immune to AI disruption. Earlier this year, the IT consulting firm AND Digital asked hundreds of US, UK, and Dutch business leaders whether AI could soon take over a CEO role—and 43% said yes. That’s on the heels of a similar survey from last year, in which 47% of senior executives said they believed AI could replace or completely automate “most” or “all” of the chief-executive role.

Experts say AI should be raising the bar for what’s expected of managers—including the big bosses. “With AI, managers should be asking themselves, ‘How can I use it to operate at the top of my license?’” says Deepali Vyas, a Korn Ferry senior client partner and global head of its FinTech, Payments, and Crypto practice.

Most of the publicity behind AI right now touts its ability to carry out rote tasks efficiently. Recent research, however, has shown that AI is also good at many tasks associated with management, including problem-solving, communication, and information synthesis. How business leaders view AI in 2024 might be equivalent to how they viewed the World Wide Web in 1993: At the time, many saw the internet chiefly as a way to communicate; not for years did companies recognize its potential for e-commerce, data capture, and other functions, says Sharon Egilinsky, a partner with Korn Ferry’s ESG and Sustainability Solutions team. “It’s a mistake to think AI is just an efficiency tool,” she says.

No firm is turning the keys over to a HAL 9000-esque AI just yet, but experts suggest reviewing job architecture—assessing how AI might fundamentally change a given role’s expectations and responsibilities. That includes executive-level jobs, too. The answers likely won’t be one-size-fits-all, experts say, so companies should carry out rigorous testing before launching organization-wide changes. “You don’t just roll it out and call it a day.” says Paul Fogel, sector leader in Korn Ferry’s Professional Search and Software practices.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership Consulting capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Paul Fogel
Sector Leader, Professional Search, Software

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation

Leadership & Professional Assessments

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by