The Graying Corner Office

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 29, 2026

The Graying Corner Office

New data says the average CEO age is now a decade older from 2000. Will younger generations miss out on the top role?

CEOs aren’t usually the youngest people at the company, but these days they’re increasingly becoming some of the oldest.

Despite millennials now surpassing baby boomers as the largest cohort in the workplace, CEOs are only getting older. Since the turn of the new century, the average age of CEOs in the United States has increased by ten years, to 61. Executives are starting in the top job later in life as well. And while some firms appear to be turning to younger leaders, the average age at which CEOs are appointed continues to rise, to 55, up from just 48 in 2000, according to a new working paper from the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Experts believe that the age jump reflects companies’ belief that complexities such as AI and constant geopolitical issues require a veteran hand. Boards want someone with a proven track record. They’re desperate for leaders who can get their organizations to perform at a top level—ideally, while also transforming and innovating, says Jane Edison Stevenson, global vice chair of Korn Ferry’s Board and CEO Services practice. “It’s the smallest candidate pool that I can remember,” she notes.

The paper looked at 50,000 CEOs at firms of all sizes from 2000 to 2023. The average CEO age has accelerated far faster, over the same period of time, than the age of the average US worker—which has gone up by only two years, from 40 to 42. The aging CEO trend is most pronounced among smaller private firms, according to the paper. Larger companies are offering internal candidates a wider range of assignments. Smaller companies value experience, the paper states, and it’s why many of them are willing to wait to hire older top executives.

To be sure, more recent data suggests that the aging trend may be peaking. The average age of newly appointed CEOs in 2025 was 54.4, down from 55.8 in 2024. If that trend were to continue, the average CEO age could decline overall but historically would remain high.

For their part, some CEOs have a strong reason for staying: They don’t want to stop working. Although a record number of CEOs have exited, the successful ones who haven’t been pushed out see no reason to budge. “The reason boomers may be staying in their roles longer has mostly to do with the desire for continuing job stability,” says Joe Griesedieck, Korn Ferry vice chairman and managing director of the firm’s Board and CEO Services practice,

But for Gen-X executives (those born between 1965 and 1980), the graying of the corner office means a longer wait to get there, if they get there at all. More than half of them are at least 50 years old. According to Conference Board research, 42% of US CEOs are over aged 60.

Gen X is also getting squeezed from the bottom. While the average age of CEOs is currently 61, many boards are now more open to appointing leaders younger than 50, believing they might better be able to navigate today’s business challenges, such as AI, digital marketing, and changing customer demographics. About 15% of CEOs are under age 50, according to the Conference Board. For a time, experts say, Gen X was perceived as being too young. Now some boards feel the other way about them, wanting fresh ideas from younger executives.

Learn more about Korn Ferry's Board and CEO Services capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

Joseph E. Griesedieck
Vice Chairman, Managing Director, Board & Chief Executive Officer Services

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

AI-Ready Leader

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Talent Acquisition

People Cost Optimization

Assessment & Succession