AI Skills Are Up 142-Fold? Yeah, Right.

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|June 3, 2024

AI Skills Are Up 142-Fold? Yeah, Right.

A surge in applicants claiming artificial-intelligence expertise leaves recruiters skeptical.

An applicant for a retail-sales role claimed “extensive experience with AI.” A tech-department applicant said they were “conversant in AI modeling.” And an HR applicant listed a “certificate in AI security.” A finance executive referenced “deep-language coding.”

Those who spend their days with their noses in résumés have observed a sea change this year: Everyone, from entry-level applicants to executives, is claiming to have artificial-intelligence (AI) skills. LinkedIn recently released data indicating a 142-fold increase in applicants listing AI know-how on their résumés over the last year. “It’s the new ‘digital skills,’” says David Vied, global sector leader for medical devices and diagnostics. “The term is already a constant, and has been watered down very quickly.”

Skepticism is warranted. Like ‘big data’ and ‘digital skills’ before, ‘AI skills’ is the latest buzz phrase to make the rounds. The concept is in vogue not just in hiring, but anywhere innovation is encouraged, such as funding rounds for tech start-ups, where AI-related pitches are more likely to get seen by investors. To be sure, buzzwords are always in play, says Shanda Mints, vice president for RPO analytics and implementation at Korn Ferry. “It’s honestly one way you have to keep up with the market, especially in the tech space.”

For job applicants, claiming to have AI abilities is currently critical to getting past résumé filters—which scan for the minimum qualifications for the role— during the hiring process. The special sauce is to make that AI knowledge directly relevant to the job, and to be able to fluently discuss and demonstrate it. “The idea is to use AI tools to do this particular job better, and more productively,” says Deepali Vyas, global head of the FinTech, Crypto and Payments practice at Korn Ferry. She notes that for people not in AI-focused roles, taking a quick AI class, like those offered by Udacity or LinkedIn Learning, can be fruitful in providing the foundational background that’s expected in all employees these days.

Experts advise applicants to clearly explain how they’re using AI, both on a résumé and during an interview. But depending on the role, familiarity with AI—versus expertise—may well be sufficient. For example, take a management position: “You may only need to be conversant and able to manage tech experts,” says Sharon Egilinsky, a partner in Korn Ferry’s ESG and Sustainability Solutions team. For other positions, simply understanding what AI can do, and being able to demonstrate that knowledge, may be enough.

For interviewers, experts suggest delving into the specifics of applicants’ skills. Did the applicant use AI as a tool, or actually develop a model? At the moment, the hybrid role is prompt engineer: someone (often with a liberal-arts background) who is not an AI developer, but understands what prompts result in good outputs. “It’s making the sausage, versus putting sausage as an ingredient in a dish,” says Vyas.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Recruitment capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

David Vied
Global Sector Leader, Medical Devices and Diagnostics

Shanda Mints
VP, AI Strategy & Transformation

No items found.

Featured Insights

This Week in Leadership (Jan 12 - Jan 18)
5 Ways to Move from ‘Toying’ to Working with AI

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Employee Experience

Attrition & Retention

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Talent Acquisition

Workforce Transformation

Organization Strategy