Purpose Deferred

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 23, 2026

Purpose Deferred

In such a tough job market, more workers are taking any job they can find—regardless of their interest in it. How that can corrode a firm’s culture and mission.

‍

Remember a few years ago, in the heady days after the pandemic and before AI, when people took jobs for values and purpose as much as for compensation? That era, dubbed the “purpose movement,” has suddenly become a thing of the past.

HR leaders and recruiters have grown increasingly concerned that in this tough job market, workers are taking roles regardless of their interest in the company’s or industry’s mission. Candidates will move from a creative field into healthcare administration, or from a marketing position in consulting to a sales gig at a commercial construction firm. And they’ll do so because they have no other choice: Long-term unemployment has been creeping up since last year, with one-quarter of job seekers taking six months or longer to find work. At the same time, job openings have shrunk by 25%, to less than nine million from their pandemic peak of 12 million.

Surveys and anecdotal evidence also show that more people are taking part-time roles or positions they are overqualified for. “In a tighter labor market, people go where the opportunities are, and purpose gets deferred,” says Roger Philby, global leader of the People Strategy and Performance practice at Korn Ferry.

Of the 178,000 jobs created in March, for instance, nearly 150,000 were in just three industries: healthcare, leisure and hospitality, and manufacturing. Healthcare, a field where hiring is struggling to keep pace with an aging population, has been the primary driver of hiring for most of the last year. “Sectors like healthcare are pulling in talent because they are hiring at scale,” says Philby, “not necessarily because there’s been a sudden surge in vocational calling.”

The question creating tension, says Philby, is what will happen next. Transactional hiring works as a short-term solution, filling industries’ need for people and providing those people with a paycheck and security in return. But culture and ultimately performance will be corroded if firms continue hiring people who aren’t strongly committed to their industry. “Over time, transactional hiring dilutes engagement and can impact the experience or service organizations are trying to provide,” says Philby.

On the flip side, Greg Button, president of global healthcare services at Korn Ferry, sees an opportunity for healthcare providers and other industries to hire talent they wouldn’t otherwise attract. He says hospitals, insurance providers, device manufacturers, and other firms in the healthcare ecosystem can capitalize on the abundance of “talented floaters” in desperately needed functions like IT, finance, marketing, cybersecurity, and yes, even AI. “There’s a lot of talent available further away from patient care that works in the favor of healthcare,” says Button.

What’s important, Button says, is that hiring for both firms and people at the clinical and administration level—the areas closest to patients—retains a mission-driven component. “At that level, if you don’t have purpose, you burn out quickly,” he says.

To be sure, firms across industries can try to create purpose for people once they are inside, says Flo Falayi, a senior client partner in the Leadership and Executive Development practice at Korn Ferry. He advises human-resources executives and other people leaders to focus on connecting the firm’s culture and mission to employees’ day-to-day work. “Purpose isn’t gone, but it is increasingly masked,” Falayi says. “It’s up to leaders to unmask it and build purpose over time.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Roger Philby
Global Lead, People Strategy & Performance Practice

Greg Button
President, Global Healthcare Services

Flo Falayi
Senior Client Partner, Advisory Practice

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Attrition & Retention

Organizational Transformation

Workforce Management

Employee Experience

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Strategy

Workforce Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by