The Sharp Squeeze on Britain’s HR Budgets

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 21, 2026

The Sharp Squeeze on Britain’s HR Budgets

AI and hiring cutbacks have quietly prompted one of the biggest resets in HR budgets in years. Could that be a mistake?

In a world of AI complexity and rising levels of burnout, workers might feel they need as much help from HR departments as possible. But leaders in the UK have taken a notably different stance, at least for now.

A significant shift in corporate-resource allocation appears to be underway. In the aftermath of the pandemic, when talent was scarce, HR departments benefited from rising budgets and newfound strategic influence with CEOs and boards. But that elevated position now appears to be softening. “HR is always one of the first roles that gets squeezed,” says Drew Hill, a Korn Ferry senior client partner for Europe, the Middle East, and Africa.

Indeed, a recent global study of CFOs and finance leaders found that HR faces the sharpest pullback in planned budgets, with only 29% of CFOs planning increases and 22% expecting cuts. The average budget growth would drop from 2.4% in 2025 to 0.7% in 2026. In contrast, well over half of those surveyed expect increases in sales and IT budgets.

In the case of the UK, organizations are feeling a sharp financial squeeze amid economic pressure, rising employment expenses, and heavy technology costs. The UK government has made some sharp changes that have added to that pressure, as it has increased the cost of employing people. That, in turn, has affected hiring and staffing decisions, says Dominic Schofield, Korn Ferry’s chair for board and CEO services in the UK. British-based HR officers are focusing more on talent development and retention than hiring. “You’re seeing unemployment rise,” he says.

At the same time, companies are facing a second, less visible cost surge: AI itself. While its adoption is accelerating, the financial burden is significant. Around 30%of UK businesses cite cost as a major barrier to AI adoption, and more than a third say high up-front expenses make it difficult to demonstrate return on investment. Even for firms that have already adopted AI, a payoff is far from guaranteed. Nearly 80% of UK organizations are now using AI, but only about 31% report a positive return on investment, underscoring a widening gap between spending and value creation. Deploying AI tools and training staff is good, but it’s not enough, says Jerry Collier, Korn Ferry’s solution leader, EMEA assessment and succession. “Without work redesign, this won’t deliver a scaled impact,” he says.

Still, regardless of the AI push, some experts say the pullback on HR will backfire. The wrong candidates can be hired, and onboarding and AI training suffer. Some firms cutting HR and people budgets to manage the short-term squeeze are, at the same time, telling their boards they are committed to AI transformation, says AJ van den Berg, a London-based Korn Ferry senior client partner. “Those two things are in direct conflict,” he notes. “The heavy lifting does not disappear when you defer, it just gets more expensive.”

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Talent Acquisition capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Drew Hill
Senior Client Partner

Dominic Schofield
Chair, Board & CEO Services, UK

Jerry Collier
Solution Leader, EMEA Assessment & Succession

AJ van den Berg
Senior Client Partner, London

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

AI in the Workplace

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Employee Rewards