5 Ways to Handle Awkward Work Situations

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 15, 2026

5 Ways to Handle Awkward Work Situations

Anyone who has ever had a job has found themselves in an awkward situation with a colleague or boss. Our experts share their advice.

A comment lands awkwardly. A presentation gets a lukewarm response. A manager slips up. Suddenly, everyone is watching—and things can get uncomfortable fast.

We’ve all experienced awkward situations at work, whether owing to our own actions or someone else’s. And experts say they’re increasingly common now that five generations are often gathered under the same firm’s roof. “Workplace awkwardness is universal,” says Val Olson Armstrong, a career and leadership coach at Korn Ferry Advance.

How people handle this awkwardness varies, however. Indeed, numerous studies report people at work feeling increased social discomfort, reticence to speak up, fear of being embarrassed, and more. Below are five awkward situations common to most workplaces.

The accidental overshare

Oversharing typically occurs when people feel either too comfortable or too anxious. In the course of a conversation, we might say something a little too personal about ourselves or someone else—something that makes others squirm. David Meintrup, a senior career consultant with Korn Ferry, says grace and humility can defuse awkward overshares. “Extend grace if someone overshares with you. Be humble if you accidentally overshare,” he says.

The long silence

It’s the day of the big presentation. You’ve rehearsed the pitch and feel confident you can win the room. But when the time comes—nothing. Silence. Just a bunch of people looking at their phones. It’s awkward, for sure, and not just for you. But Olson says to resist the urge to fill the silence by backpedaling or doubling down. “Composure goes a long way to demonstrate confidence,” she says, “even if it doesn’t feel like others are with you.”

The manager mess-up

Managers don’t make mistakes, except when they do—which can create an awkward situation for employees. For instance, should you correct your boss if he’s mispronouncing a client’s name in a meeting? What if he’s making a bigger error related to, say, financial reporting? Before taking action, Meintrup recommends asking yourself whether it’s a hundred-dollar (i.e., small) problem or a million-dollar (major) problem. It’s probably best to let smaller problems pass, he says. For bigger ones, you should remember that you aren’t trying to correct your boss, Meintrup says, but rather helping them save face.

The unexpected handoff

It happens all the time: You’re in a meeting or presentation when a colleague or manager puts you on the spot. Suddenly you have to answer a client question or give an update you weren’t prepared for. All eyes turn to you, but you don’t have anything to offer. “We’ve all been in a situation like that,” says Ryan Frechette, an associate principal at Korn Ferry. In such situations, he says, the key is to remain calm and respond without undermining credibility. “Respond intentionally and mindfully, even if you don’t know the answer,” he says.

The misunderstood assignment

Everyone on the team seemed clear about the assignment, which exacerbated the insecurity you felt when you didn’t understand it. Experts say that self-conscious employees, especially younger ones, often avoid asking for clarification or more details; in the end, this only worsens matters. Olson recommends acknowledging your confusion at the outset so that you don’t misunderstand the assignment and create more work for your colleagues down the line.

‍

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Leadership and Professional Development capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Val Olson
Career & Leadership Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

David Meintrup
Career Coach, Korn Ferry Advance

Ryan Frechette
Associate Principal

No items found.

Featured Insights

The Sharp Slicing of HR Budgets
The Leadership the AI Era Requires

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Beyond Coronavirus

Future of Work

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Talent Acquisition

Cultural Transformation

Korn Ferry Career

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by