Leadership Is Evolving. Are You?

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|January 29, 2024

Leadership Is Evolving. Are You?

We have extensively researched and listened to leaders from around the world to get a global view on what it’ll take to succeed in the years ahead.

Key takeaways

How leadership is evolving from a global perspective
What the evolution of leadership means for your own development
How to embrace an uncertain future—following advice from global leaders today

Table of Contents

The leader for the future will be unlike any we've seen beforeTomorrow's leaders will be the Connector-in-Chief in any business
They'll need a brain for change
Adapting will come as easily as breathing
They need a vision for the future
Listening will always be active—and reactive
They'll act bold and be resilient
Trust is always a must

What do current leaders think about the future? Here's their advice
Get ready to lead at the speed of change

Leadership Development

Leaders who can tap into the power of all

Learn more

We've surveyed over 400 CEOs from around the world as part of our ongoing CEO for the Future study. And every year, we tap hundreds of senior executives from the World's Most Admired Companies to identify the top attributes for success.

We've collated what we've learned over the years to give you a global perspective of how leadership is evolving. One Success Profile doesn’t fit all, but there are clear traits, drivers and characteristics tomorrow’s top leaders are likely to have in common.

Featured Insights

Three Hallmarks of Effective Leadership Development
How to Develop Individual Contributors into Emerging Leaders
Transform Your Workforce with Employee Coaching at Scale
Future-Proof Your Company With the Workforce Skills You Need

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Coaching

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Professional Development

Coaching

Board & CEO Services