Bucking the CEO turnover trend

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Bucking the CEO turnover trend

A new report reveals how Korn Ferry assessments increase the likelihood that chief executive officers will stay longer in their role.

In the ever-evolving corporate landscape, the stability and efficacy of leadership stand as pivotal factors for a company's success. Korn Ferry's recent exploration into CEO succession provides invaluable insights that shed light on the broader implications of CEO turnover on organizational performance and growth.

Our analysis of 87,000 chief executives uncovered an alarming pattern: An estimated 11% of newly appointed CEOs part ways within their inaugural year. This percentage swells to a substantial 34% by the close of their third year. Such frequent changes in leadership can stop an organization’s momentum, creating ripples that affect every level of the company.

Businesses can buck this trend, however, by utilizing assessments to evaluate potential leaders. In fact, findings from our research reveal the significant impact of Korn Ferry leadership assessments on CEO tenure. Compared to the broader CEO population, CEOs who were recommended by Korn Ferry after going through a rigorous proprietary assessment had a noticeably lower attrition rate, with less than 18% leaving their company by the third year. In other words, the use of leadership assessments resulted in a 47% decrease in CEO turnover.

"The assurance of strong leadership is a governance imperative for today’s boards,” says Jane Stevenson, Vice Chair of Korn Ferry’s Board & CEO Services Practice. “Our research proves that a thorough, objective selection process can make all the difference in a company’s success. Selecting a CEO that lasts, creates sustainable value for all stakeholders.”

It is worth noting that CEOs who were assessed by Korn Ferry not recommended showed a 31% three-year attrition rate, closer to the average 34% for CEOs in general.

From our research, we also discovered certain salient qualities that define successful leaders. In particular, two characteristics of enduring leadership emerged:

Inclusive decision-making. Leaders who consistently thrive are those who prioritize inclusivity, valuing the perspectives of others, and encouraging collaboration.
Purpose-driven strategy. Effective CEOs extend their vision beyond personal ambition. They forge alliances across diverse stakeholders, focusing on overarching, organization-wide goals.

CEO succession transcends a mere handover of the leadership reins. It's fundamentally tied to strategic pivots—be it reshaping organizational culture, refining operations, or restructuring leadership alignments. "If a CEO isn't engaging in the right way with stakeholders, customers, their team and broader workforce, it will really impact their ability to be effective, and therefore their tenure, over the short term,” says Stu Crandell, Senior Client Partner in Korn Ferry’s Board & CEO Services Practice.

The message is compelling: Fresh CEO appointments signal a pivot toward a future path. And, when executed carefully, CEO transitions can usher in revitalized strategies, fostering both near-term performance and long-term transformation.

“Adapting for the future requires transformational leadership at the top,” says Evelyn Orr, Head of Korn Ferry’s CEO and Executive Assessment Practice in North America. “Our research has shown that CEO tenure is related to successful transformation outcomes. Korn Ferry’s CEO assessments are designed to help boards select candidates who are more likely to stay in the role longer, to see their strategic agenda through.”

Korn Ferry’s seminal research on CEO attrition offers a panoramic view of the dynamics of leadership transitions. For organizations, stakeholders, and leadership hopefuls, these insights illuminate the paths to enduring success, emphasizing the importance of thorough selection processes and the qualities that define transformative leadership.

For more information, learn more about Korn Ferry’s Board & CEO Services.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Guangrong Dai
Senior Director of Research, Korn Ferry Institute

Evelyn Orr
Senior Client Partner, Board & CEO Succession

Stuart S. Crandell
Senior Client Partner

Jane Edison Stevenson
Global Vice Chair, Board and CEO Services, Global Leader, Board and CEO Succession

No items found.

CLICK IMAGE TO DOWNLOAD PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Leadership

Board & CEO Services

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by