Working models for employee effectiveness

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Working models for employee effectiveness

A new Korn Ferry reports offers five strategies to unlock performance and growth through work-life integration.

The winds of change, in the form of automation, artificial intelligence (AI), and digitalization, are shaking up industries across the world. This is pushing everyone to reimagine how they work. Automated tasks are freeing up employees to focus on more creative and challenging projects that inherently bring more value to all organizations.

Businesses need to make the most of this shift, to rethink traditional organizational structures and work processes. Companies that are adapting to today's fast-paced, ever-evolving work environment are moving ahead by fostering a culture of innovation—one of collaboration, and one that promotes ongoing learning and developmental growth for their entire workforce.

This change is happening rapidly and leaders who engage in this change discussion will move ahead. Employees, at all levels, are making decisions based on where and how they want to work and have differing expectations for flexibility, working conditions, and life balance. “These changes are not just temporary. They represent a fundamental shift in the way people are approaching their careers,” says David Herrera, Associate Client Partner and Head of People and Organization Analytics at Korn Ferry. “Organizations that engage employees regarding accommodating these expectations are better positioned to attract and retain top talent.”

What’s more, data shows burnout rates continue to climb, thanks to long working hours, high stress levels, and the never-ending barrage of new technological tools. And with high turnover, low engagement, and poor performance, companies are starting to recognize that a worn-out workforce isn’t productive.

One way to tackle these challenges effectively, experts say, is by designing working models that promote work-life integration. With access to video calls, instant messaging, collaboration platforms, and online file sharing, many jobs no longer need people to be in the office every day—or at all. This gives employees freedom and flexibility to organize their day, to get the job done in the way that works best for them. “Workers who are enabled and have access to the right tools, in a balanced way, not only help the company succeed but also grow personally and feel more engaged in their jobs,” Herrera says.

In its latest report, Working Models for Employee Effectiveness, Korn Ferry delves into the changing dynamics of the workforce, offering valuable insights on how to build the future of work—from supporting autonomy to leading in a remote world. The paper also outlines five essential strategies for creating operating models that promote inclusivity and prioritize workforce well-being, ultimately driving employee effectiveness and organizational success.

If business is focused on growing your organization, your workforce needs work structures that boost employee productivity. And companies that get this right are in a “prime position to unlock business performance and growth,” says Nina Boone, a Korn Ferry Senior Client Partner and Commercial Leader for the Organizational Strategy practice in North America. “It’s not just about improving the workplace. When employees feel valued and can work in the way that suits them best, magic happens.”

To find out more, learn about Korn Ferry’s Organization Strategy capabilities.

Our Expert

Our Experts

No items found.

Amelia Haynes

Researcher, Korn Ferry Institute

CLICK IMAGE TO DOWNLOAD PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Future of Work

Organization Strategy

Organization Design & Analytics

Business Transformation

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by