High Potentials in Flux

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

High Potentials in Flux

A new Korn Ferry paper explores how developing programs keep high-potential talent on board.

Authors: Tom Wrobleski, Emily Gianunzio, Bryn Chighizola

In these uncertain times, where a large portion of the workforce may face layoffs, it's more important than ever for companies to hold onto their top performers. A recent Korn Ferry report reveals just how crucial it is to keep high-potential talent, especially during times of organizational changes.

In 2023, over 1.64 million people in the US lost their jobs, and this number could rise, especially in industries like tech. When companies reorganize or downsize, it often affects high-potential employees the most. But replacing them can be expensive for companies—sometimes costing them up to five times the employee’s yearly salary, according to research.

One way organizations can show they value their top talent is by offering specialized training and development programs. In its new report, “High Potentials in Flux,” Korn Ferry explains how these programs help employees grow their skills and feel supported by their company, which can make them more likely to stay. “As businesses change over time, those that focus on developing their top employees ensure they're ready for whatever comes next,” says Tom Wrobleski, Global Account Lead in Korn Ferry’s Consumer practice and co-lead of its new Supply Chain Talent Optimization offering. “This helps develop future leaders who can tackle tomorrow's challenges with confidence.”

Recently, Korn Ferry teamed up with a global agricultural retail company to create a custom high-potentials program for developing leaders in senior director and director roles. This program brought together high-potential employees in a structured way, fostering a sense of community where they could learn and share experiences.

Success in this program relies on giving these emerging leaders diverse training experiences, covering things like global business trends, money management, and handling tough conversations. Experts say it’s also important for them to be able to apply what they've learned to real situations in their company, reporting to the C-Suite how they’ve put these lessons into practice. “Having support and active involvement from top executives is crucial,” Wrobleski says. “Their time and resources help build trust and connection and show that employee development is a priority for the entire company.” This commitment, he adds, sends a strong message throughout the organization.

The program, detailed in the new Korn Ferry paper, also included peer-to-peer mentorship, where high-potential employees could learn from each other. This built camaraderie and allowed cohorts to share information and knowledge. Korn Ferry found that, combined with cross-functional training, it helped participants connect across the organization.

Indeed, a recent Korn Ferry survey found that, in addition to formal training programs, mentorship and job rotations are also key for helping high-potential employees advance in their careers. This is because a supportive work environment, which includes peer and manager support, significantly influences how well new skills and knowledge learned during training are used on the job, according to Korn Ferry’s research. “Strong work relationships are key to employee retention, and fostering a sense of community among high potentials is a way to utilize that concept and keep them,” says Emily Gianunzio, Research Analyst with the Korn Ferry Institute, Korn Ferry’s research arm.

Looking forward, it's clear that companies need to focus on building a strong foundation for keeping their best employees. By communicating openly, offering specialized training programs, and ensuring a fair process for identifying talent, organizations can set themselves up for success in the long run. “It ensures they have strong leaders ready for the future,” Gianunzio says.

CLICK IMAGE TO DOWNLOAD PDF

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Institute

Attrition & Retention

People Strategy & Performance

Assessment & Succession

Leadership & Professional Development

Leadership Development

Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by