Pay Transparency: Britain and the EU on Divergent Routes

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

This Week in Leadership|April 20, 2026

Pay Transparency: Britain and the EU on Divergent Routes

As a key deadline for EU firms approaches, UK firms take a different approach toward pay disclosures. Which will work better?

Businesses have long been less than transparent about who gets paid what. But back in 2018, Britain broke the mold and led the way on mandatory gender-pay-gap reporting. It was a landmark step toward pay equity. And at the time, the UK was the largest economy to have embraced such rules.

But the world of pay is changing fast. The UK is reconsidering its existing pay-transparency rules, which are largely voluntary. And the neighboring European Union is attempting to leapfrog the UK with tighter rules. Meanwhile, many states and cities in the US have put laws on the books requiring job postings to list pay ranges. “The EU saw what Britain did and copied it, then went further,” says Ben Frost, Korn Ferry’s senior client Partner in EMEA.

While the EU’s and UK’s goals are similar—ensuring that there is pay transparency—their respective approaches are quite different, says Tom McMullen, a Korn Ferry senior client partner and total rewards expert. The EU approach is prescriptive and will be backed by legislation that goes into effect this June. It includes financial penalties for companies that don’t fully comply.

The UK’s current system is narrower and more principle based, McMullen says. It relies primarily on gender-pay-gap reporting, but only for employers with 250 or more employees. Britain has general equal-pay protections, but only limited transparency rights. Employees can discuss pay, but not request relevant data. Employers aren’t required to make salary disclosures in job postings, nor are they banned from asking salary-history questions, McMullen says. “In the UK, it’s still largely a communication choice.”

At the moment, communication is where the UK arguably falls further behind. Many organizations have pay programs, but struggle to articulate a clear and compelling “pay story” to employees—particularly around how pay is set, how progression works, and how fairness is ensured. All of that needs to improve, experts say.

Still, the UK seems to be ahead of Europe in the pay-transparency game for now, despite the absence of any legislation to govern it. One study indicated that 70% of UK job listings included pay details, compared to much lower figures in Germany (16%) and Italy (20%)—two of the largest economies in Europe. Experts do point out that the coming EU laws will likely change those ratios.

The pressure on pay transparency goes beyond legislation, says Neelam Chohan, a Korn Ferry associate client partner for EMEA focused on diversity, equity, and inclusion advice. People are demanding more fairness and accountability in the workplace, she says. Gen Z, those currently in their 20s, is openly comparing pay. “It’s no longer a taboo subject,” she says. “Platforms like Glassdoor and Indeed mean pay data is available and employees are comparing companies.”

What will Britain do next? The British government will likely pursue a more robust approach to pay transparency, but will be closely watching as the EU approaches its June deadline, says Ian Milton, a Korn Ferry senior client partner and head of UK and Ireland total rewards. Some EU member states are already requesting more time to comply with the directive on this matter. Either way, Milton believes there is a slight risk that a government push for more pay transparency could affect raises and job creation. “That could be a worst-case scenario,” he says.

Learn more about Korn Ferry’s Pay Transparency capabilities.

Read more This Week in Leadership articles

Our Expert

Our Experts

Benjamin Frost
Senior Client Partner, EMEA

Tom McMullen
Senior Client Partner

No items found.

INSIGHTS TO YOUR INBOX

Stay on top of the latest leadership news with This Week in Leadership—delivered weekly and straight to your inbox.

​

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Article|July 3, 2026

The Glitter Leader

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

July 3, 2026

This Week in Leadership (June 29 - July 5)

Article|July 1, 2026

6 Ways to Handle Work During Vacation

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

This Week in Leadership

Leadership

Organizational Transformation

AI in the Workplace

Pay Transparency

People Strategy & Performance

Change Management

Organization Design & Analytics

Organization Strategy

Kornferry5 PT

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by