6 Vital Traits for APAC’s Future CEOs

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Leadership|November 2, 2023

6 Vital Traits for APAC’s Future CEOs

Your next CEO will need to navigate ambiguity, show vulnerability and lead with curiosity and conviction. Here’s how to cultivate those traits from within.

Key takeaways

The four things APAC CEOs need to manage in themselves and in others
Six traits that will set future leaders up for success
How coaching can help leaders reach a higher level of performance

Great leaders are crucial to building great companies. And in a world where challenges show no sign of abating, CEOs and future leaders know they need to up their game.

“They need to re-set, find new sources of energy, and broaden their perspectives to sustain the momentum for change,” says Stephen Johnston, Senior Client Partner with Korn Ferry.

In what historian author Yuval Noah Harari describes as an ‘age of bewilderment’, no one expects the CEO to know all the answers. But only the CEO can speak to the entire organization. Their role underpins future business success. And leadership development teams play an increasingly important part in building their resilience to do just that—in a way that empowers and engages everyone.

CEOs as ‘meaning makers’

When asked what defines a successful CEO in the Asia-Pacific region, Johnston describes the fundamental attributes they need to manage—in themselves and in others.

“Their role is fundamentally different to any other role,” he says. “They can’t get bogged down in 1,001 different things. They need to focus on clarity of purpose, building capability, motivational energy, and holding themselves and others accountable.”

He describes clarity as being a ‘meaning maker’—helping people understand their role in the organization’s purpose and journey, and how that guides decision-making. Looking within, it also means being clear on what their personal purpose is as a leader.

“It’s the same for building capabilities, they need to be aware of their own strengths and gaps,” he explains. “If they can spend time on these four dimensions for themselves and others, it’s very powerful.”

Leadership Development

Leaders who can tap into the power of all

Learn more

What will differentiate the APAC CEO of 2025—and beyond?

Our research has identified the six fundamental capabilities that future CEOs will need to succeed. Underpinning all these traits, according to Johnston, is a tolerance for ambiguity.

“The world is not black and white, and the really good CEOs will need to draw on curiosity and conviction to navigate this,” he says.

Curiosity helps them distinguish fact from fiction, and continuously test their perspectives against other views and knowledge. Conviction, in the face of ongoing scrutiny, helps them make the right decisions for the right reasons.

Here are six ways your leaders can harness their inner curiosity and conviction and steer their teams through uncertainty.

1 Power teams by leading with purpose

In our eBook on APAC leadership, APAC CEOs said the courage to make big or difficult decisions, as well as the ability to empower and delegate decision-making, are both critical leadership characteristics for future CEOs.

They can only do these things if the leaders and their teams are very clear on their organization’s purpose.

“Effective leaders look at purpose through both a visionary and strategic lens,” says Johnston.

He gives the example of a major insurance group in Australia. “They make every decision based on whether it will contribute to making their customers’ world a safer place.”

This level of clarity helps leaders to galvanize their teams into action.

2 Seize every opportunity, always be ready for change

Our research into how APAC leadership styles changed post-pandemic found people can adapt quickly when given clear direction and reasons to change.

“We have to expect that the world is not going to be linear and benign. And that requires us to take the world as it is and to adapt to it,” said the CEO of a holding company in Singapore.

However, Johnston notes agility can feel evasive when organizational structures are complex.

“We hear in our coaching conversations about the need to simplify and streamline, so we can be more responsive,” he says.

3 Talk straight and be more trusted for it

In the post-Royal Commission environment in Australia, there is a strong focus on having honest conversations in the financial services sector. Johnston describes this as “liberating the culture around speaking up.”

“Leaders need to be more constructive in the way they challenge their teams,” he says. This also requires a safe environment to call out issues—and can be more challenging in some Asian cultures where there is a fear of falling short of perfection.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Stephen Johnston
Senior Client Partner

Featured Insights

How to Make Face-to-Face Work: 5 Ways
5 Ways to Tailor Skills to What Firms Want
6 Signs Leaders Lack AI-Readiness—And How to Fix It
5 Ways ‘Night Owl’ Workers Can Thrive

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

High Performing Executive Teams

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Leadership

High Performing Executive Teams

People Strategy & Performance

Leadership Development

Kornferry2 LD