6 Ways to Stay Motivated at Work

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Career Advice|December 11, 2023

6 Ways to Stay Motivated at Work

Feeling tired and unmotivated at the office? Follow these six steps to boost your drive and performance.

Key takeaways

Feeling uninspired at work is not an uncommon problem
Why defining the mission behind every job can help jump-start the day
What to avoid and what to embrace when motivation is low

Staying inspired and keeping up morale is a perennial problem. Feeling unmotivated and tired can impact professionals for any number of reasons, not all of them work-related. The following tips can help to remedy the balance.

1. Cut your team and yourself some slack

There are legitimate, scientifically proven reasons for feeling unmotivated and fatigued. While stress can sometimes create an energy boost, times of increased anxiety and uncertainty can add significant challenges to efficiency and state of mind. Routines that normally offer comfort may not hit the spot. It’s important to recognize an extraordinary situation and accept a certain lack of momentum.

2. Create a personal “motivation mission”

When a person’s environment feels chaotic or unsteady, it can be hard to identify the rationale behind even the most crucial tasks. Changing the narrative can remedy this lack of purpose.

It helps to ask oneself how the current workload fulfills the company’s mission, serves the client or customer, helps colleagues succeed, impacts the community, contributes to personal family wellbeing, or fuels personal growth.

The most compelling answers to these questions can fuel a mission for getting work done. For example, “As a controller, I help keep my company financially healthy, allowing us to provide jobs to hundreds of people.” Or, simply, “I’m working to pay for my son’s college education.”

3. Plan and prioritize each day

If motivation is the reason to get a job done, willpower is the mental fortitude to overcome obstacles. But it’s important to know that there is only so much of it in a day. That’s why planning and prioritizing are critical.

It helps to make a list of tasks and goals for each day, being realistic about how much can be achieved and breaking large jobs into small, achievable pieces, if necessary. The most important tasks should sit at the top, to be tackled first—that way, when willpower expires, at least the critical items can be crossed off. It can be satisfying to view that list of accomplishments at the end of the day, even if some tasks remain.

Leadership & Professional Development

Help your people exceed their potential, so they can unlock yours

Learn more

4. Schedule time for the jobs you enjoy

Each day should include one or two uplifting tasks, slated towards the end of the workday. Not only does that help boost productivity when willpower is at a low, but "good” jobs can serve as rewards—something to look forward to—and replenish motivation for the following day.

5. Take a break from doomscrolling

The internet—and the 24-hour news cycle—is inescapable, even during the workday. Ironically, the best way to fight technology temptation is with more tech. There are free services that can be programmed to block heavily used sites for certain hours of the day, and there are apps to help keep phone use in check. Some apps even provide motivating rewards for staying off a device.

6. Commit to just getting started

Experts say motivation usually kicks in after you start a job, not before you begin. So, a simple commitment to opening that document or making that first phone call can get the juices flowing—even if it’s only for 30 minutes. Once the work has begun, it’s more likely to be finished. If it doesn’t get finished? Well, at least you moved everything ahead by half an hour.

Unleash your team's potential

Korn Ferry works with clients around the world to develop their workforce and help their employees stay engaged, in order to unleash their full potential. Find out more about how we can help.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

Leadership & Professional Development

Featured Insights

Tariff Toss-Up
6 Signs Leaders Lack AI-Readiness—And How to Fix It
Affordability: It’s a Crisis for Companies, Too
The Great Tariff Decision

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Career Advice

Leadership & Professional Development

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by