The Key to Finding and Retaining Talent

Korn Ferry

​

​

​

Talent Recruitment|July 27, 2023

The Key to Finding and Retaining Talent

Discover the secrets of attracting and retaining talented employees—and how top talent helps your business innovate and grow.

Key takeaways

How to ensure your organization attracts engaged and high performing top talent
Why thinking outside the box when it comes to recruiting talent can promote innovative thinking
How incentives and upskilling can help retain top talent

No matter the economic climate or the latest recruitment trends, the truth is that finding top talent is always a challenge. That’s because the best people are rarely out of work, except by choice. And whether you’re trying to lure them away from a competitor or their sailboat, your recruitment offering and employee experience need to be exceptional in order to attract and retain exceptional people.

“Top talent always has—and always will have—options,” says Juliana Barela, Korn Ferry’s North America Vice President and General Manager for Recruitment Process Outsourcing.

The difficulty of recruiting top talent is a tale as old as time. In 2018, we forecast that by 2030, a global skills and staff shortage would see 85 million positions unfilled. And given the current difficult state of recruitment and retention, this bleak prediction seems increasingly likely to be correct.

How can you prevent your organization from becoming part of this statistic—and instead keep your positions filled with the right people, your staff aligned with your strategy, and your teams engaged and excited about your business?

Finding the best people

Before you start the search for your next strategic leader or innovative team member, you need to carefully consider what you need now—and what you’ll need in the future.

You also need to consider the wider halo around the new hires—the effect you intend the leader or the team member to have on others around them in the organization. Do you need people to drive vision, bring new skills, enhance collaboration, create new processes or focus on execution? In other words, what are the organizational level impacts this person or team should achieve in their role?

When you have a clear picture of what’s needed, the first place to look could be within. Who might be upskilled into this role? Next, consider those who left for a job with a competitor, went into a different field or took a short career break. Many people quit their jobs, even though they like the company. They might leave because there’s no room for career development, or so they can take some time out for familial responsibilities. If you can now offer them a more interesting proposition, they might be very happy to return.

Try to think beyond the usual suspects. More diverse choices broaden your options, and interim talent could bring in bold and innovative thinking to challenge and change.

Sealing the deal

With a higher cost of living, financial compensation has become more important to attract top talent. Research for Korn Ferry’s Future of Work Trends report found that six in ten people would take a less satisfying job for higher pay. And it’s likely that this figure is higher in reality as not all respondents might be willing to admit that salary is important to them.

But Ron Seifert, Korn Ferry Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward and Benefits Leader, points out that an attractive hiring package isn’t just about money. Quality medical, dental and pension benefits can help seal the deal with top talent. And more than ever, recruits are looking for genuine flexibility, more vacation time, work-life boundaries and clear potential for career advancement.

Offering a package that shows that you value, trust and respect your staff can make your company much more appealing, increasing the likelihood that potential hires will choose you over your competitors.

Talent Acquisition

Finding talent that sees you through today and tomorrow

Learn more

Keeping candidates engaged

During the hiring process, you’ll have discussed the candidate’s career aspirations and shared with them the possible opportunities for career progress. But do you carry through with this after they’ve signed on the dotted line? Too often, the answer is no.

Companies must work to make sure these development opportunities actually happen once they’ve joined the business. Barela says, “It’s about telling employees, ‘I care about where you want to grow within the company—and I know about your specific career goals’.” You need to show real understanding of their personal needs when discussing their goals and make clear your willingness to help them get there.

That could mean upskilling with training or allowing them to spread their wings. “Give them the chance to take part in new strategic initiatives,” says Seifert. And while financial rewards are always welcome, including them in impressive company-funded destination experiences, where meaningful discussions are had away from the office, can make “top performers feel included and valued,” says Seifert.

Meaningful experiences are helpful in building confidence in your people – the confidence that can help them seize the career opportunities you also need to provide. Korn Ferry research shows that only half of employees feel confident in their ability to achieve career objectives in their current role, and it’s up to leaders to create the opportunities for them to do that.

It’s such an important way to keep your people engaged and fully aligned with the business’s strategic goals. And while you may be hiring people with high potential, unless they’re engaged, you won’t be able to unleash it.

Employee engagement happens to be very good for your bottom line too. Our research finds that companies with top engagement scores had twice the net profit and 2.5 times the revenue growth of organizations with low scores.

Our Expert

Our Experts

Elizabeth Schaefer
Senior Client Partner, Human Resources Officers Practice, Executive Search

Juliana Barela
Senior Vice President & General Manager, North America RPO, Senior Client Partner

Ron Seifert
Senior Client Partner, North America Workforce Reward & Benefits Leader

No items found.

Related Capability

Related Capabilities

People Strategy & Performance

Cultural Transformation

Talent Acquisition

Executive Search

Professional Search

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Interim Executives & Professionals

Featured Insights

2026: The Make-or-Break Year for Careers
How to Make Face-to-Face Work: 5 Ways
Should Parents Crash Job Interviews?
A New High-Cost Center: Hiring

Related Insights

See All Related Insights
​

Follow Us

LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Instagram
YouTube
iTunes
Spotify

© 2026 Korn Ferry. All rights reserved.

Contact
Store
Subscribe
Terms
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences

Do Not Sell My Info
Accessibility

Featured Topics

Talent Recruitment

People Strategy & Performance

Cultural Transformation

Talent Acquisition

Executive Search

Professional Search

Recruitment Process Outsourcing

Total Rewards

Employee Rewards

Interim Executives & Professionals

Kornferry RPO

We use our own and third-party cookies and similar technologies to enhance and personalize your experience, analyze use of our website and conduct marketing. For more information, please see our Global Privacy Policy and our Cookie Policy. You may choose to consent to our use of these technologies, or manage your own preferences.

Accept All    Necessary Cookies Only    More Information   Powered by