The Gap Between AI Adoption and Value Realization—And Why Leaders With Strategic Judgment Are Key to Closing It | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Gap Between AI Adoption and Value Realization—And Why Leaders With Strategic Judgment Are Key to Closing It

For the first time since we began tracking external impacts on business, technological change has emerged as the factor leaders believe will have the most influence over their organization’s health in the next 12-18 months.1  This jump is inextricably linked to the rise of artificial intelligence.

Once largely a topic of investigation and experimentation, AI implementation has permeated the mainstream. Russell Reynolds Associates’ latest Global Leadership Monitor (GLM) reveals that:

AI adoption has soared, with over one-third of leaders reporting that their teams use it in their day-to-day workflows.

Leadership’s belief in the need for AI literacy in the C-suite is nearly universal.

The skills that matter most to leaders today have less to do with AI and everything to do with being human.

Organizations’ AI readiness is (inconsistently) improving, suggesting that upskilling and process improvement efforts are taking effect.

While AI enthusiasm remains high, actual impacts on business outcomes are mixed.

Without fundamental transformation in the next decade, 74% of leaders say their organizations will cease to exist. Our latest GLM shows that AI and tech change are major drivers behind that belief.

As AI becomes the backdrop against which modern leadership plays out, public sentiment towards AI is growing more polarized. To ensure your workforce is aligned with leadership’s AI strategy, merely adopting AI is not enough; the challenge becomes translating use cases into behavior change, decision-making, and meaningful process and performance improvements. This article explores both leaders’ on-the-ground progress with generative AI (GenAI) tools and what’s required of executives to lead through this transformative moment and into the human-AI age of work.

Adoption soars: Over one-third of leaders report that their teams use AI in their day-to-day workflows

Leaders take generative AI seriously, with 35% now reporting that it’s fully implemented in their team’s day-to-day workflow. That’s a massive jump from a year ago, when only 19% of leaders could say the same (Figure 1). Conversely, only 9% say their teams haven’t taken any steps to implement AI, meaning leaders globally have recognized its strategic importance.

The real question: what’s the strategy behind these AI adoptions? Action without strategy is ultimately more about keeping up appearances versus true value realization.

Measuring AI activity is fairly easy: trainings conducted, active users, prompt volume. But measuring AI transformation is much harder. Meaningful adoption is grounded in specific use cases, workflow redesigns, decision-making quality, and strategic operational architecture change.

Figure 1: YoY GenAI adoption progress by leaders globally (2024-2026)

% of leaders answering “to what degree has your function or team implemented generative AI?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2026 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,477 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders;
H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,891 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders; H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,382 CEOs, C-suite, board, and next generation leaders

Leaders should be shifting from asking “should we implement AI” to “how well is our AI transformation scaling, creating value, and being governed with our company’s context?”

Leadership’s belief in the need for C-suite AI literacy is nearly universal

This implementation momentum is matched by a continued rise in leadership expectations, with 90% now believing a strong understanding of GenAI is a non-negotiable for future C-suites. As AI literacy moves from a differentiating advantage to a baseline executive capability, executives increasingly see AI skills as a core element of enterprise leadership.

Leaders’ confidence in their own AI abilities is improving, but it’s less universal. Just over half (52%) of leaders now believe they have the right skills to help implement AI in their organization. Still, that’s a jump of 11 percentage points since last year.

This is meaningful progress, but it also shows that leaders’ belief has moved faster than their readiness. Executives increasingly understand that AI matters, but many are still building the practical fluency to lead adoption effectively.

The skills that matter most to leaders today have less to do with AI and everything to do with being human

With this established belief in the importance of AI skills, one might expect tech literacy to be the expertise that leaders view as most important for tackling the biggest impacts on their business. But that’s not the case.

Instead, leaders are most likely to name strategic thinking as the most crucial skill for addressing these factors—55% of leaders rank this skill highest, a staggering 24 percentage points more than the 31% who ranked decision-making and change management in the top three among skills leaders need (Figure 2).

Next are resilience (27%), innovation/creativity (26%), and purpose-driven leadership (21%). Interestingly, these “soft skills” beat out tech literacy and financial acumen, which only 17% and 11% of leaders name, respectively.

Figure 2: The necessary skills for facing top factors impacting organizational health

What skills do you think are most necessary for leaders at your organization to face the top factors impacting organizational health?

(% of executives who selected as a top 3 skill)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Global Leadership Monitor H1 2026 | Base: CEOs, C-level, next-generation, and board leaders (n=2,161)

In the face of massive tech shifts, leaders are recognizing that the leadership skills that tap into their judgment and humanity are the differentiators for future success.

This prioritization shows that even as leaders express deep enthusiasm for AI, they’re balancing it against meaningful concerns about individuals failing to develop critical thinking skills and judgment due to overreliance on AI and the potential harm that dependence could have on their long-term talent pipelines.

Our leadership experts agree: AI calls for leaders who can lead through change, display a humane leadership style, and continuously evolve and develop. In the future of work, leadership assessment will expand beyond what leaders know to how they think. As they commit to AI adoption, leaders must also recognize how it will reshape career pathways, learning, and judgment—even (especially) their own.

AI’s impact on leadership and why this matters

AI is changing the kind of potential that leaders must demonstrate to succeed in an AI-enabled world

“As AI becomes central to strategy, operations, and transformation, we’re seeing a growing awareness among leaders that technical capability alone isn’t enough. Bridging the AI skills gap requires an approach that pairs technical training with adaptive leadership and cross-functional collaboration.”
Fawad BajwaLeadership Advisor, Russell Reynolds Associates

Organizations’ AI readiness is (inconsistently) improving, suggesting upskilling and process improvement efforts are taking effect

Leaders’ confidence in their organizational capabilities slightly increased over the last year but remains mixed. We saw the largest gains in forward-thinking leadership (the only category to crack 50% confidence), employees’ technical skills (42%, the biggest year-over-year increase), and AI processes and safeguards (both of which made nominal gains) (Figure 3).

Data quality remains an issue. In H1 2026, confidence that the organization has accurate, high-quality data on which to build AI solutions remained around 40%, where it’s been for the past year, confirming that AI won’t change data quality issues. If anything, it highlights them.

Board capabilities remain the area in which leaders feel least confident, with only 29% saying they have the right expertise on the board to advise on their AI implementation.

Figure 3: Organizational AI readiness (H1 2025 vs H1 2026)

% of leaders strongly agreeing/agreeing that their organization has...

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2026 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,477 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders; H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 2,294 CEOs, C-suite, board, and next generation leaders

Deep dive: The AI governance gap

Our AI governance data from H2 2025 shines additional light on this board confidence gap. Only 35% of leaders think their organization had a clearly defined AI policy—less than the 38% who say they do not.

More concerning: only 27% of leaders believe that stakeholders understand and reference their organization’s AI policy when leveraging new AI technologies in their work. This implies that even where governance structures exist, they may not yet be embedded in day-to-day workflows.

With over half of leaders believing that boards will be found negligent if they fail to facilitate AI implementations in their organizations, boards should note these gaps as opportunities to further train their workforce on how to get the most out of AI, create corresponding usage policies, and establish ownership models.

AI-driven productivity is up, but the effect on revenues and profits is less pronounced

While AI enthusiasm remains high, actual impacts are mixed.

AI clearly demonstrates early operational value. When respondents were asked what impact GenAI had in the prior 12 months, 67% reported that team productivity had increased, and 57% reported an increase in team skills and capabilities (Figure 4). These findings suggest that Gen AI’s early returns are appearing first in how teams work, further reinforcing that upskilling efforts are beginning to take hold.

By contrast, direct financial and business-model impacts appear more muted. Only 25% of leaders reported an increase in their organization’s profitability due to AI, and only 22% reported an increase in revenue streams.

Figure 4: GenAI’s organizational impact over the last 12 months

% of leaders answering “What impact did generative AI have on the following areas in the last 12 months?”

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1080 leaders

This complicates simplistic narratives about AI as either an immediate revenue transformation engine or a straightforward headcount-reduction tool. GenAI produces visible gains, but they’re concentrated around productivity and capability, rather than in broad financial transformation.

To close the gap between AI adoption and realized value, organizations need strategic leadership

The organizations that succeed will be those that move beyond experimentation and tool deployment toward a more disciplined and systematic AI transformation: stronger data and technical foundations, reimagined talent strategies and long-term succession planning, better governance, and leadership with the judgment and potential to know what’s worth doing.

From a talent perspective, this requires CEOs and their C-suites to:

To learn more, visit the RRA Systems View  for leading through AI transformation

READ HERE

References

1 Technological change was the most ranked factor that leaders believe will impact their organization’s health in the next 12-18 months in our H1 2026 Global Leadership Monitor. Sixty-three percent of all leaders named tech change as a top factor, making it the most selected external impact for the first time in the GLM’s history. Other top factors (in order of rank) are uncertain economic growth, geopolitical uncertainty, availability of key talent/skills, and workforce transformation.

Authors

Pam Attinger co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. She is based in San Francisco.
Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.
Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic is Russell Reynolds Associates’ Chief Science Officer. He is based between London and New York.
Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology & Tech Officers Commercial Strategy & Insights teams. He is based in London.
Tuck Rickards is a senior member and former leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in San Francisco.

The authors wish to thank the 2,700+ leaders from RRA’s global network who completed the H1 2026 Global Leadership Monitor. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2026 and beyond.

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceCybersecurityBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO Succession

Why Tech-Q Alone Isn’t Enough: Bringing the Right Technology Expertise into the Boardroom

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsNext Generation BoardsTransformation and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceCybersecurityTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

The New Qualified Technology Executive: Redefining Board-Level Technology Expertise in 2026

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices