What’s on the Mind of the Emerging Generation: Insights from India & Southeast Asia | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What’s on the Mind of the Emerging Generation: Insights from India & Southeast Asia

Board and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersFamily EnterpriseC-Suite Succession

Article

July 14, 2025

7 min

Board and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersFamily EnterpriseC-Suite Succession

Executive Summary

Emerging leaders in Indian & Southeast Asian family businesses balance legacy, innovation, family unity, and leadership transformation.

Close

Sanjay Kapoor

New Delhi
Mumbai

Rahul Thapar

Mumbai
New Delhi

Rohit Tanwar

New Delhi
Mumbai

Family underpins the cultural and social fabric of India and Southeast Asia — including their businesses, where family enterprises generate over 75% of India’s GDP, one of the highest percentages globally.  Many family-owned businesses have demonstrated remarkable success, thriving across market cycles and growing over multiple generations.

Across multiple Asian markets, family enterprises, large and small, are witnessing a significant generational change in leadership.

Over the past few years, extensive research on family-owned businesses has focused on the generation leading the enterprises. However, with the emerging generational shift, it is increasingly important to understand the vision, aspirations and challenges of the next generation. With that goal in mind, Russell Reynolds Associates interviewed many future leaders of successful family enterprises based in India and Southeast Asia, from second-generation entrants to established members of the fourth-generation. These are well-established, family-owned conglomerates with annual revenues ranging from $300 million to over $10 billion.

Over six months, we spoke with individuals spanning from early-career entrants to Chief Executive Officers. While these enterprises differ in industry, location and scale, what’s on the minds of the emerging generation is remarkably similar.

They see themselves as the stewards of a multi-generational legacy

The next generation views themselves as guardians of a successful multi-generational legacy and are fiercely protective of that position. They are acutely aware of their responsibility and recognize that family name and legacy are associated with business success, making it imperative for them to succeed. Many believe that preserving their family’s legacy is the greatest weight on their shoulders. “[I’m] here because of what my father and grandfather have done — [I] never forget that. They give [me] the platform,” one respondent said.

Yet while they are committed to maintaining previous generations’ success, they don’t rely solely on tradition. They contemplate their own leadership styles and how to blend core values and modern ideas. “We want to grow as responsible owners of the business, while not losing the original family values, which have influenced the success of the business,” one interviewee said. Recognizing this balancing act and the pressures involved is crucial for supporting and effectively engaging with these leaders.

They face career anxiety

Despite their privileged position, these young leaders grapple with significant career anxiety. Although there is less pressure, than in past generations, to stay in the family business, the option to forge new paths introduces a different set of challenges. Leaders or potential successors who leave the family business often worry about their own career trajectories. “If I break away to do something different, will I be able to find market credibility for who I am?” one participant asked.

Conversely, those who stay often wrestle with fears of failing to add further value or being labeled as entitled. One interviewee was “anxious about leaving a mark.” With personal and business success so intertwined, these leaders face immense pressure to prove themselves professionally. That pressure often results in working doubly hard, with many concerned about their ability to generate growth in an already well-established business and not slipping into wealth-preservation mode.

They value family unity

A critical concern for the emerging generation is maintaining family harmony, while making business decisions. One respondent said succinctly, “I do not want to risk losing my siblings over business conflicts.”

Perhaps learning from past familial disputes, the emerging generation demonstrates more awareness and understanding of the complexities in balancing family unity and business interests. Many identify potential pitfalls and come up with possible solutions before issues arise. For example, some have created “efficient and structured family forums” with one family member acting as a moderator, while other leaders hold monthly family meetings to work through issues.

Others see financial success as a potential pitfall and try to “structure the business and wealth early so that we can avoid future conflicts [over money].” This approach marks a significant shift from previous generations, which may have focused more on immediate business needs than on long-term family cohesion. For these emerging leaders, preserving family unity remains a top priority and significantly influences their strategic decisions and business practices.

The emerging generation is likely to drive significant changes to their businesses. The following characteristics differentiate the emerging generation from traditional leadership and will influence change and transformation in family-owned businesses in the coming years.

Openness to new ideas

As family businesses mature and progress beyond the current generation, this new wave of leaders brings a fresh perspective and increased self-awareness of their strengths and weaknesses.

This generation acknowledges that they may not always be the smartest person in the room. They understand that humility and external support are vital to their success and are not afraid to seek help and advice from coaches, mentors and industry experts. By acknowledging their limitations, they demonstrate a proactive approach to leadership, ensuring they take advantage of outside resources to complement their strengths and drive business success. A cultivated network of trusted advisors ensures that their leadership style is informed, reflective and innovative.

Furthermore, these young leaders aspire to make their mark and differentiate themselves from their predecessors. Many see their role as changemakers, driven by a desire to innovate while maintaining tradition. “I have realized that with each generation, we have to transform and unlearn,” one interviewee said. This mindset reflects a profound understanding of their job and their role.

Their openness to transformation extends to an enthusiastic interest in trending themes such as ESG, technology and artificial intelligence. By integrating these into their businesses, they not only build their credibility but position their companies as modern and leadership as game-changing. Their curiosity and willingness to embrace new ideas are among the most notable distinctions from previous generations, enabling them to navigate complex challenges with agility and foresight.

Deliberate leadership

As they gradually rise in their businesses, these emerging leaders strive to be thoughtful and considerate about their leadership style. They grapple with questions like, “What kind of leader do I want to be?” and “What is the right path for me?” They understand that the business landscape today is vastly different than it was when their companies were founded, and they recognize the importance of forging their own path and leaving behind a legacy of their own.

A common pathway for these leaders involves starting at the bottom and working their way up. Typically they begin their careers in smaller, operational roles in which they gain hands-on experience and a deep understanding of the business. As they demonstrate their capabilities and commitment, they take on larger responsibilities, managing more aspects of the business and contributing to strategic decision-making. This transition is deliberate and often takes years to play out, allowing them to build experience and confidence, while establishing their own circle of trusted colleagues and mentors across the business.

As their businesses mature, many also take charge of diversifying the family’s wealth, while recognizing the importance of safeguarding and expanding their financial legacy. They seek new personal revenue-generating opportunities and family brand growth – either formally, through the creation of a family office, or informally, through individual ventures. This proactive approach not only helps secure their personal financial legacy, but also positions these leaders to capitalize on innovative trends and sunrise sectors. By exploring different investment vehicles, they ensure that the family’s wealth is both resilient and adaptable to changing market dynamics.

Looking ahead

The next generation is on the way up: They are becoming leaders of multibillion-dollar companies and influential board members. Their thoughts and actions will shape industries and create significant economic impact. Unlike their predecessors – who often lacked the freedom to take risks—this new generation brings fresh energy and ambition. They are educated, motivated and deliberate in how they approach leadership, the businesses they want to build and the legacy they intend to leave behind.

Understanding their mindset provides insight into the future of family business leadership, the ongoing transformation due to generational shifts, and these leaders’ potential impact on some of the most significant businesses in the region. The emerging generation stands on the cusp of significant leadership transformation, ready to navigate the complexities of modern business, while honoring their familial heritage.

Authors

Sanjay Kapoor leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Family Enterprise Advisory practice in the Asia Pacific region. He is based in New Delhi.
Rahul Thapar is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Family Enterprise Advisory practice. He is based in Mumbai.
Rohit Tanwar is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Family Enterprise Advisory practice.  He is based in New Delhi.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices