AI in Finance: Unlocking Potential and Overcoming Barriers | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

AI in Finance: Unlocking Potential and Overcoming Barriers

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationFinance Officers

Article

November 14, 2024

8 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationFinance Officers

Executive Summary

AI is set to transform the Finance function – unlocking it’s power will require a strategy.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Linda Barham

Chicago

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

The finance function, like many others, is on the edge of a tech revolution, driven by AI and part of a wider wave of innovation. As AI and generative AI gain traction in the market—with its potential to improve forecasting, automate tasks, and enhance strategic decision-making—this technology is set to transform how CFOs manage operations, strategy, and competitiveness. While trustworthy AI use cases for the finance function are still in their nascent phase, it’s estimated that 80% of finance-related activities have AI applications within the next 5 years.1

Despite this potential, many CFOs feel unprepared to engage with this technology. Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor found that, while 69% of CFOs believe understanding AI is crucial for future leaders, only 28% feel confident in their ability to implement it.

Even with the lack of confidence, over 60% of CFOs have taken developing action towards implementing GenAI, with only 1% having successfully implemented it  (Figure 1) — behind both CEOs (71%) and Technology Officers (89%). This gap highlights a significant challenge: while CFOs recognize AI as crucial, many are taking steps towards implementing a technology they don’t fully understand. As such, further development and external advising will enable CFOs to take advantage of AI’s benefits.

To uncover the applications of AI in the finance function and empower finance leaders to develop and hire for the skills necessary to enable its power in the finance function, Russell Reynolds Associates aims to uncover:

The transformative potential of AI in finance

Barriers to AI implementation in the finance function

Strategies for successful AI adoption

Figure 1: AI implementation progress among global CFOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=80 CFOs

The transformative potential of AI in finance

AI is increasingly being integrated into various aspects of the finance function, promising significant advancements in efficiency, accuracy, and strategic decision-making (Figure 2). Specifically, AI is driving change in:

Real-time, and predictive forecasting: AI is transforming financial forecasting and planning processes via predictive analytics. Finance teams can forecast accurate and timely future forecasts using historical company data, as well as broader industry data. Siemens, for example, is harnessing the power of AI to elevate their financial reporting and improve their financial forecasting accuracy.

Optimization: Effective cash flow management always ranks high on CFOs’ priority lists, and AI is proving to be a valuable tool in cash flow optimization, one example of optimization via AI in the finance function. Companies can now leverage AI agents, software entities designed to perform specific tasks, to compile data from all relevant sources to continuously predict cash flows.

Risk management: AI models identify and prevent transaction errors or violations of accounting principles in real time, helping to improve audit and accounting efficiencies. Mastercard is starting to leverage AI to enhance its financial analytics, especially around transaction monitoring and fraud detection. Similarly, PWC has built an AI bot called GL.ai to accelerate the audit process, while simultaneously generating insights to boost efficiency.

Figure 2: AI use cases for transforming the finance function

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ literature review, 2024

Barriers to AI implementation in the finance function

The path to AI adoption is fraught with challenges, particularly in areas such as knowledge and expertise, data quality, and system integration (Figure 3).

Key barriers identified by the finance function

Knowledge and expertise: Many finance leaders cite a lack of knowledge, expertise, skills, and competencies as the primary barrier to AI implementation. This is especially prevalent in organizations that are in the early stages of exploring AI. Concerningly, only 15% of CFOs strongly agree/agree that their organization has employees with the right technical skills required to implement generative AI solutions.3

Data quality and governance: Poor data quality and challenges related to data governance, compliance, and security are significant concerns, especially as AI models rely heavily on accurate and comprehensive data.

Resistance to change: Both CFOs and next-generation finance talent are concerned about employees’ resistance to change slowing the adoption of AI. This resistance often stems from concerns about integration with existing systems, ethical implications, fear of AI taking away jobs and biases in AI outputs.

Resource constraints: The implementation of AI technologies requires significant time, resources, and investment, which can be limiting factors for finance teams already stretched thin.

Next-gen finance leaders are more attuned to AI implementation barriers

There is a distinct contrast between the concerns of CFOs and next-gen finance leaders regarding AI (Figure 3). Since next-gen finance leaders are more immersed in the organization’s daily operations, they are more aware of—and place greater emphasis on—the key challenges of AI implementation, such as data quality and governance, potential biases, and the broader issues of AI ethics and safety. Most significantly, next-gen finance leaders are almost 2x more likely to view bias in outputs as a barrier to implementation than CFOs.3

Next-gen leaders' concerns highlight the need for discussions on strengthening AI policies related to data quality, use cases, and governance. While next-gen leaders are more concerned about these issues at the functional level, only 13% of CFOs agree that their organization has the processes in place to protect itself against AI misuse and mishaps, and only 14% agree that they’re getting the right level of guidance to harness AI ethically and safely.3 This signals a broader issue with organization-level policies impacting AI and highlights the importance of consulting external AI and transformation experts when implementing this technology.

Figure 3: Top barriers for finance teams implementing generative AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n=139 CFOs and next generation finance leaders

Strategies for finance’s successful AI adoption

A thoughtful and strategic approach to implementation will be critical in advancing finance’s AI capabilities, including:

Research and market analysis: Engage in comprehensive research to understand AI's potential within the finance function, ensuring readiness for market shifts. Check-in with your industry CFO network to learn who is ahead of the change curve and the best practices they’ve adopted.

Who are the industry CFO leaders who are ahead of the change curve?

What are the best practices they’ve adopted for the key use cases you see opportunity in?

Partnering with technology: Core to AI enablement is an “enterprise mindset,” across the C-suite, in which leaders focus on the success of the team and the company, rather than on their specific function’s prowess. Key to this mindset is collaborating with tech leadership, both to expedite AI implementation and mitigate risks. Ask the following to begin defining what this tech-finance partnership might look like:

Who owns AI functionally and where do they sit in the organization?

What role does AI play in the 5-year vision for your organization?

How are you partnering with the owners of AI in the organization?

Developing use cases: Investigate where AI can be leveraged in your current finance processes.

What are the low-effort, high-reward AI applications in the finance function?

As proficiency grows with AI, ask what are more complex implementations of AI that are high-reward?

Assessing the finance team’s AI capabilities: First, assess your Finance talent for their readiness and potential to implement AI, by creating Leadership Portraits for your Finance executives. Then, reconcile where skills need to be developed, versus outsourced or recruited. Ask the following to begin understanding your team’s AI skills and aptitude:

Do you have the right capabilities and people to address transformational changes in the finance function?

How are you assessing your finance team to ensure they are innovative, versatile, and curious?

How do you plan to continuously develop the skills needed on your team?

Do you need to hire externally to fill any gaps on your team?

The GenAI opportunity is in the hands of the entire organization. The most powerful approach to AI transformation equips the entire organization—including finance—with the tools and leadership to drive change across the business at every level.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI practice globally. He is based in New York and Toronto.
Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice in the Americas. She is based in Chicago.
Jenna Fisher co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice globally. She is based in Palo Alto.
George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Mohammed Khan is a member Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Catherine Schroeder leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

Sources

1 Generative AI in the Finance Function of the Future, BCG, 2023
2 Russell Reynolds Associates’ literature review, 2024
3 Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 & H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor
4 AI and ML Design Resources, Siemens
5 Mastercard leverages its AI capabilities to fight real-time payment scams, Mastercard, 2023
6 Harnessing the power of AI to transform the detection of fraud and error, PWC
7 Decoding the Future: The RRA Systems View on Leading Through AI Transformation | Russell Reynolds Associates

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices