AI Readiness: The Four Steps CEOs Need to Take to Build AI-Powered Organizations | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

AI Readiness: The Four Steps CEOs Need to Take to Build AI-Powered Organizations

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationSuccessionTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

Tristan Jervis

April 09, 2025

5 min

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationSuccessionTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and Benchmarking

Executive Summary

We share the four critical actions CEOs need to take to supercharge AI transformation at their organization.

Close

Tristan Jervis

London

In an era where artificial intelligence is redefining the foundations of business and society, leadership itself must transform. We stand at the precipice of the most significant technological revolution in modern history—one that will separate organizations that thrive from those that survive.

The stakes are clear: our research found that 54% of leaders rate technological change as a top five threat to organizational health in the next 12-18 months. Senior executives recognize the urgency and necessity of AI transformation. But, only 45% feel confident in their organization’s ability to effectively transform.

The fundamental misconception many leaders harbor is that AI transformation is only a technological challenge. It's not. At its core, it's a leadership challenge—one that demands new capabilities, mindsets, and approaches. This is not about incremental change. This is about fundamental transformation.

We know that committing and implementing large-scale transformation isn’t easy—it’s a huge undertaking. We share the four actions CEOs need to address to supercharge AI transformation at their organization, including ensuring you have the right leaders today, as well as in the wings, who are able to shift their ways of working and adopt AI at scale.

01 Assess the AI readiness of your leadership team

Is your C-suite team willing and able to spearhead transformation? In today’s leadership landscape, leaders need more than technical knowledge to drive AI transformation. It’s becoming increasingly important to determine whether C-suite teams have the ability to evolve and grow amidst a rapidly changing AI landscape.

We believe that the most effective, transformation-ready leaders demonstrate four leadership qualities:

Drive and resilience: the determination to pursue ambitious goals despite setbacks.

Curiosity and adaptability: the willingness to question assumptions and embrace new approaches.

Systems thinking: the ability to understand complex interrelationships across the organization and ecosystem.

Social intelligence: the capacity to navigate relationships and influence diverse stakeholders.

Beyond these factors, truly transformational leaders possess self-knowledge and a clarity of purpose that allows them to realize their potential—and help others do the same.

We work with organizations to assess whether their C-suite leaders possess these leadership qualities, and identify where any potential gaps may lie. We look beyond traditional definitions of leadership success to identify executive with the dynamic skills needed to spearhead AI transformation and navigate a fast-changing world.

02 Unlock your existing leaders’ AI potential

For many organizations looking to transform, their immediate instinct is to identify and select new leadership talent to drive AI transformation. And in some cases, this is the right thing to do.

But, in many cases, the capacity for transformation will already exist within an organization. Our leadership advisors use our AI Quotient framework to measure leaders’ AI readiness, curiosity, and adaptability to provide CEOs with a view on whether they have transformation-ready leaders in their organization.

But, often the challenge lies in having the know-how to unlock and accelerate this potential. This requires uncovering where the strengths and weaknesses as a C-suite team lie; are they capable of effectively evolving the culture or do they need help to facilitate a critical mindset shift? Are they comfortable embracing experimentation and taking risks, or are they afraid of failure? With structured development plans, CEOs can take their organization’s AI transformation up a gear.

03 Find AI-transformation ready leaders

Our research found that only 32% of leaders expressed confidence that they have the right skills to implement AI in their organizations.

To fill this gap, many CEOs will look externally for C-suite leaders and next-generation talent to bolster their leadership talent pipeline. Increasingly, we are seeing interest in hiring Chief AI Officers. While these leaders can help define the AI strategy for the organization, they’re not right for every business. Who you need at the helm largely depends on what you want to achieve.

But, if you decide to search for a Chief AI Officer, CEOs should consider three key things: that they have proven AI implementation expertise, that they can combine this technical knowledge with change management capabilities, and that their skillset compliments existing strengths and aligns with the organization’s business goals and strategy.

04 Plan for an AI-powered future

AI transformation isn’t a passing trend—it’s here to stay. And that means building a robust leadership pipeline is essential if you want to effective drive AI transformation at scale.

Organizations that treat AI leadership succession planning as a continuous, evolving process rather than a periodic exercise will maintain their competitive edge. This includes regularly reassessing the leadership capabilities needed as AI technologies mature and new applications emerge.

Ensuring succession is a continual process also means creating intentional development paths that expose high-potential leaders to AI initiatives, innovation labs, and cross-functional transformation projects.

The time for transformation is now

As AI continues to redefine what's possible, the organizations that thrive will be those with leaders who don't merely respond to technological change—they harness it and use it to create extraordinary value.

The stakes couldn't be higher. Organizations that successfully navigate this transformation will unlock unprecedented efficiency, innovation, and competitive advantage. Those that falter risk irrelevance in an AI-powered future.

Authors

Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in London.

Learn how to adopt AI fast and at scale:

Artificial Intelligence Advisory

Find out more

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices