How Boards and New CEOs Can Establish a Strong Relationship | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Boards and New CEOs Can Establish a Strong Relationship

LeadershipSuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard EffectivenessCEO Succession

Article

October 17, 2024

5 min

LeadershipSuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard EffectivenessCEO Succession

Executive Summary

RRA has identified some of the common mistakes new CEOs make with their boards, how to spot them, and what directors can do to mitigate them.

Close

Ty Wiggins

London

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Margot McShane

San Francisco

Reprinted with permission from the National Association of Corporate Directors after originally appearing as a Directorship online article on October 16, 2024.

Of all the responsibilities boards have, none is more crucial than the selection and appointment of a new CEO, and over the past decade, the stakes have been raised to make the right decision. Russell Reynolds’s Global CEO Turnover Index analyzed the CEO turnover data of listed companies globally, including those in the S&P 500, FTSE 100, Nikkei 225, and S&P/ASX 200. It showed that since 2018 an average of 10.9 percent of new CEOs at the world’s largest listed companies failed to make it to the two-year mark; this has increased to 15.1 percent through the first quarter of 2024.

In light of this, boards should remember that they play a critical role in ensuring the successful transition of CEOs and, in turn, help lay the foundation for their long-term success. There is a mutual responsibility to ensure the board-CEO relationship gets off to a good start.

For many new CEOs, taking on the top job puts them in new territory with the board. Not only do the board and board-related activities consume 25 percent of a CEO’s time in their first year on average, according to Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO Transition: Defining Success in the First 12 Months, but it is also a significant shift: having had a singular boss for much of their careers, CEOs must now deal with multiple bosses who are not involved in the day-to-day business. This is something that many new CEOs find to be a challenge.

Below are some of the common mistakes new CEOs make with their boards, how to spot them, and what directors can do to mitigate them.

Failing to Prioritize Building the Right Relationships With the Board

New CEOs have an abundance of responsibilities and they can struggle to prioritize their actions. The demands and noise from below will often be far louder than from above. However, one of the worst things a new CEO can do is ignore or avoid the board while they try to handle other important things.

This is a lesson that some CEOs realize too late. One transition regret shared regularly by new CEOs in the CEO Transition: Defining Success in the First 12 Month report is that they wished they had better used the board in their first couple of years. Over time, they get a greater sense of what the board can deliver and realize that, for a variety of reasons, they did not engage the board in the most effective way early on.

New CEOs and directors should start early to form a positive relationship, often before a CEO officially enters the role. For example, PepsiCo’s Ramon Laguarta spent significant time with his board early on, even though he had already been exposed to many of them during the 20-plus years he’d been with the company. “I tried to create a personal relationship and the space for them to tell me what they really thought about the business,” said Ramon in The New CEO, Lessons from CEOs on How to Start Well and Perform Quickly (Minus the Common Mistakes).

In early conversations with the new CEO, boards should make sure that relationship-building is encouraged as a priority and made easy. If it is not an early action on the new CEO’s to-do list, then directors should push for it.

Assuming Silence Is Approval

Often, experienced directors give new CEOs space and time. They step back to allow the CEO to find their feet, explore the organization, and form their own impressions. However, this should be made clear to the new CEO. Otherwise, the CEO may assume that a silent board means a job well done—and take the lack of comment, direction, or intervention as a glowing endorsement of their brilliance.

Ultimately, there is a fine line between being too involved and too absent when it comes to the relationship with new CEOs. CEOs need the board’s engagement, interest, and challenge to make the best decisions for the organization. Without that, they lose a valuable set of inputs that are built into the organizational design to benefit them.

Not Understanding the Board’s Role Versus Theirs

For some new CEOs, the distinction between their role and the board’s role is far from crystal clear. In some cases, it’s downright opaque. We have seen situations where the CEO had full support from the board and others where the CEO title should have been “general manager.”

Ultimately, new CEOs need to understand the scope and role of the board and what makes a board effective. Two of a board’s primary functions are to hire (and fire) the CEO and to approve the strategy. CEOs and boards who are not aligned on their roles and responsibilities will invite conflict, as will CEOs who think it is their job to manage the board.

One common gray area is designing versus approving the strategy. In our experience, the right answer is that the board approves the strategy, though it does not design it. Yet, we have seen many boards overstep the mark in terms of strategy, especially when there is a new or first-time CEO. This is an area where directors need to be extremely clear from the start, preferably from the interviewing stage: boards don’t design the strategy; CEOs do.

A commonly cited phrase is that good boards should have their “noses in, but hands out.” Conceptually this is true: directors should understand what is happening, what decisions are forming, and what challenges lie ahead of the organization while leaving the running of the business to the CEO and the senior leadership team.

It can often take the first year or so to find a workable rhythm between the board and a new CEO. This can be accelerated by the CEO dedicating the time to get to know each director individually. This involves forming the right relationships and establishing the “right to lead,” or the shared understanding of where the CEO’s role starts and stops and where the board’s role starts and stops. Tolerating ambiguous boundaries early on may set the relationship up for trouble for the future—something that every board has a vested interest in trying to avoid.

Russell Reynolds Associates is a NACD strategic content partner, providing directors with critical and timely information, and perspectives. Russell Reynolds Associates is a financial supporter of the NACD.

Authors

Margot McShane coleads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas.
Rusty O’Kelley is a senior advisor and consultant to corporate boards and CEOs globally and coleads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas.
Ty Wiggins is a trusted advisor to world-leading CEOs, helping them successfully transition into their roles to unlock business and personal success faster.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices