Session 6: How CEOs in Consumer Industries are Adopting AI—and Their Top Lessons for Success | RRA AI CEO Lab | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Session 6: How CEOs in Consumer Industries are Adopting AI—and Their Top Lessons for Success

RRA AI CEO Lab

We brought together CEOs from a range of consumer industries, including retail and publishing, to hear how their organizations were actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology. Here is what we learned.

Three key takeaways from our conversation with CEOs whose organizations are actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology.

CEOs need to orchestrate organized chaos in AI experimentation

Focusing on growth, not efficiencies, can help avoid a culture of fear around AI

CEOs can’t delegate AI to the Chief Digital Officer; they need to lead the charge

Because AI is changing so incredibly quickly, the people element of AI is potentially even more important than the technology.”

CEO attendee
RRA AI CEO Labs

How CEOs in consumer industries are adopting AI

To achieve customer personalization at scale. CEOs stressed the importance of using AI to provide more tailored interactions with consumers. One shared: “Five years down the road, the ones who win in this industry will be those who master the consumer journey and do personalization at scale—and AI is the biggest enabler for that.” Another CEO in the hospitality sector shared how they were planning to use AI to offer personalized member experiences.

To drive creativity. CEOs are also using AI to drive creativity and innovation across R&D and marketing and sales. One said: “We’ve seen incredible improvements in how fast and creative our design team can be using GenAI.” Another added: “Marketing and content is relatively low-hanging fruit when it come to AI adoption. That’s happening in real time across a lot of organizations.”

To avoid radical disruption. Many attendees shared the risk of being radically disrupted, outperformed, or falling behind the competition. “The number one risk is being out innovated,” one CEO shared.  Another added: “Our sense is that if we don't go really, really quickly, either our current competitors will do it or somebody else using the foundation models will outpace us. So, we're looking at almost every touch point of our company.”

Key lessons from CEOs whose organizations are actively adopting AI

Our attendees shared the opportunities, challenges, and lessons they had faced when implementing AI across their organizations.

Lesson 1: The role of the CEO is to orchestrate organized chaos in AI experimentation

CEOs spoke about the importance of unleashing a culture of experimentation across the business.

One CEO shared how the pace of change was so fast that CEOs often “don’t have time to reflect on how they’re going to [adopt AI].” They said: “We just jumped in.” They added that after a year of experimentation, they were now looking at how to scale AI implementation. The company is currently working with multiple technology platforms, including ChatGPT and start-ups, as well as their own models. “We want to be first to market, we want to make progress, but we're also starting to think through how we build it,” they said. Key to this is sharing best practices, with the CEO sharing how they regularly exchanged notes with another divisional CEO across the company about what was working and what was not. But they acknowledged: “This all sounds organized when I talk about it, but it's not at all—it’s chaotic.”

Tuck Rickards, leadership advisor at Russell Reynolds Associates, shared how this was a common theme among many CEO conversations: “We’re hearing this concept of organized chaos, where you're unleashing experimentation, but the CEOs will organize the chaos,” he said.

Another CEO shared that while it can be overwhelming to know where to start, focusing on critical business priorities and small wins can help build confidence. “You can apply AI basically anywhere in your business, but it makes sense to think strategically about your main business priorities for the next five years and your key pain points,” they said. “Start with a few things that are very simple and say, ‘Let’s try to have impact within two weeks.’ Then, we’ll do a few things that might take us two or three months, and then we’ll start to build more difficult things because that creates momentum.”

Lesson 2: CEOs need to avoid creating a culture of fear around AI across their organizations

The group talked about the importance of adopting a people-first approach to AI. “We believe that because AI is changing so incredibly quickly, the people element of AI is potentially even more important than the technology,” they said. The CEO added that AI needs to be driven both top down, and bottom up, stressing the importance of not just educating and upskilling the C-suite team but also frontline employees. The goal is to ensure the C-suite understands the art of the possible (and  impossible) as well as the risks—and to generate a culture of agility across the organization. “The reality is that if you start with a few small projects with the right partners, and you have a few people who are passionate about AI in your organization and become super users, you can get a very long way,” they said. “There is so much fear about AI that transformation needs to be 30% about the technology and 70% about culture.”

Other CEOs shared how they were training their workforces on AI, including asking super users to share their best practices with other teams. “The early adopters have created training videos and are running sessions, rolling out their experiences to our 9,000 employees to see what other ways they can use AI to enhance our internal processes.”

Another CEO shared how they were also training all employees on AI, but added: “We are not thinking we’re going to win or lose based on productivity gains. We’ve really been focused on shipping value,” they said. Another agreed, adding that: “Before we do any cost savings, let’s focus on growth, and very visible AI applications that employees will like and benefit from. Otherwise, you just create this huge fear around AI.”

Lesson 3: CEOs can’t delegate AI to the Chief Digital Officer; they need to lead the charge

There was agreement that AI was “everyone’s problem,” but responsibility started at the top, with the CEO. There was also discussion about the benefits of CEOs getting their hands dirty with AI to truly understand its potential and keep pace with the scale of development. As one attendee shared: “I always stay really close to the engineers because I know that's the frontier of what's happening. They had been telling me for some time to watch the development of language models, so they were on my radar screen, but I’d never used it. And then once I did in December 2022, I was absolutely struck from the moment I typed my first prompt. Then I bought two accounts and reorganized the whole company. We’re still scrambling just to keep up with how fast things are moving.” And, as another CEO said, “The CEO needs to personally be close to the builders of AI; I’d put that high on the to-do list priorities.”

RRA’s Tuck Rickards added: “The recommendation would be, from all of our conversations, is to build a CEO AI Cabinet made up of internal and external stakeholders to both enable the business, but also to experiment and listen and learn,” he said. “A lot of the feedback from the group is that you can't delegate this to a Chief Digital Officer, the CEO of a business needs to own the legacy of the business model and the legacy of the team.”

Changing remits and ways of working of leadership was also a hot discussion with “expectations of the leadership team [based] more around increased rate of learning, than core skillset change”. Some attendees had plans for structural change, with product and technology being pushed closer together, and “a much stronger integration of all consumer-facing departments—with sales, digital, marketing, and technology needing sitting under one leader or division so they're working in a connected, agile way.”

View the previous session

Back to RRA AI CEO Lab main page

View the next session

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices