Getting Ahead of The Looming C-Suite Succession Crisis | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Getting Ahead of The Looming C-Suite Succession Crisis

Career TransitionsCulture RiskSuccessionHuman Resources OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

May 14, 2025

7 min

Career TransitionsCulture RiskSuccessionHuman Resources OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Most next-in-line C-suite leaders are considering leaving due to dissatisfaction with the current C-suite. What are you doing to avoid this?

Close

Miriam Capelli

Singapore

Adele Farag

London

Scott E Smith

Dallas

In today’s exceedingly volatile business landscape, one thing remains true: no company can outperform its leadership. However, according to Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor, organizations are facing a looming crisis amongst their next generation C-suite leaders.1  An alarming 71% of next generation C-suite leaders are considering a career move outside their current employer,2  with turnover intentions increasing by 14 percentage points over the past two years.3

What’s driving this desire to leave? Career advancement (47%), seeking different type of leadership (36%), seeking new responsibilities (35%) and seeking a different company culture (30%) are top reasons for next generation C-suite leaders’ high turnover intent.4  This reasoning aligns with RRA’s Leadership Confidence Index, which found that next generation C-suite leaders’ confidence in their C-suite has been consistently declining over the last four years.5

To better understand this important cohort’s concerns, we interviewed 22 next generation C-suite leaders. These interviews surfaced these leaders’ strategic goals and tactical wants. One thing is clear: without addressing next generation C-suite leaders’ concerns, organizations may soon face a talent deficit at the top

Next generation C-suite leaders are seeking three key priorities

Through our research, we identified three priorities that next generation C-suite leaders are looking for to elevate their career journey.

Transparent succession planning processes

Only 25% of next generation C-suite leaders feel their executive leadership team has a successful C-suite succession strategy.6  These next generation C-suite leaders noted that their organizations often lacked clear pathways for emerging leaders and that more could be done to identify and nurture high-potential talent. And these shortcomings aren’t just being flagged by those not included in a succession process—among next generation C-suite leaders who have been part of a recent succession process, only 36% feel that the process was transparent (Figure 1).7

These figures suggest that many next generation C-suite leaders are dissatisfied with their organizations’ current succession practices, which could translate to lower commitment to the organizations and a higher likelihood to seek out alternative employment opportunities.

Figure 1: Next generation leaders lack confidence in succession practices

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 559 Next generation leaders | Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,406 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders (294 CEOs, 553 C-level leaders and 559 next generation leaders)

The biggest pitfall that I have observed in succession planning is a lack of transparency. Having honest conversations on where people are going, what progression looks like, and whether people can truly get there is more engaging for the individual, as they can see words and actions are aligned. When a person isn’t going to get there, organizations can still make them feel valued in different ways. This speaks volumes in a culture that consistently demonstrates its words and actions.”

Next-in-line CEO, global consumer company

Differentiated leadership development and training

Next generation C-suite leaders expressed aspirations for C-suite roles but acknowledged a “hazy vision” for how to get there. While the majority (67%) of next generation C-suite leaders say that their current career goal is to become a C-suite leader, most do not see a pathway, with only 52% reporting access to developmental opportunities (Figure 2). This leaves leaders unclear on how to broaden their experiences, sharpen their skills, and differentiate themselves for the C-suite.

Figure 2: Next generation C-suite leaders’ aspirations and developmental opportunities

1. Source: RRA H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,247 next generation C-suite leaders
2. Source: RRA H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,193 next generation C-suite leaders
3. Source: RRA H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,247 next generation C-suite leaders

Next generation C-suite leaders are quick to point out the importance of continuous learning, but even when given developmental opportunities, they often don’t see a clear connection between these activities and their path to the C-suite. While next generation C-suite leaders rated coaching and mentoring as two of the three most impactful development activities, only 45% reported that their organization provides coaching, and only a dismal 27% receive mentoring (Figure 3).

A coach brings a background in leadership development disciplines to advise leaders on how to accelerate and sustain desired leadership behavioral changes to reach optimal performance.

A mentor is a senior executive with a track record of leadership success who helps a mentee close experiential gaps in tackling specific business and role challenges by sharing their business knowledge, skills, and leadership experience.

Figure 3: Next generation C-suite leaders’ leadership development opportunities vs their impact

Source: RRA H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,181 next generation leaders

This indicates that, while organizations may believe that they’re investing in next generation leaders’ development, those investments may be misplaced. To retain these leaders, organizations need to provide more structured development opportunities that are clearly connected to career progression, rather than development for the sake of development.

An executive leadership team that role models the right culture and behavior

Only

36%

of next generation C-suite leaders feel their senior leadership team role models the right culture and behaviors

Culture is every leader’s imperative, and understanding how to influence, steer, and steward culture is a primary role of leaders. However, only 36% of next generation C-suite leaders feel their senior leadership team role models the right culture and behaviors . Critically, next generation C-suite leaders who do not believe their senior leadership team exemplifies the right culture and behaviors are 1.51x more likely to leave their organization.

When an executive leadership team doesn’t role model the right culture and behaviors, it can lead to a lack of trust. This, in turn, can result in a lack of motivation and accountability across the organization. It also leads to more transactional, versus collaborative, operations. Given that next generation C-suite leaders tend to be in strategy critical or key value driving roles with several direct reports themselves, there is risk of a multiplier effect if their motivation, accountability, and collaboration falter.

A strong appreciation for organizational culture and clear articulation of that culture can lead to more productive employees, improved performance outcomes, and accelerated growth. Many next generation C-suite leaders emphasized the importance of a collaborative and inclusive leadership style, valuing diverse perspectives and fostering environments where team members can thrive by adapting and leading through disruption, ambiguity and change.

I watched the way the executive team historically operated. It’s been dysfunctional – factions competing that create operational silos. That culture needs to change if we want C-suite leadership to be aspirational for our next generation leaders.”

C-level candidate, APAC financial services organization

How leaders can engage and elevate next generation C-suite leaders

To get ahead of this looming next generation attrition crisis, we see leading organizations:

Establishing a well-defined succession process. Best-in-class organizations have a clear view as to which roles are key to the future, what skills and competencies will be needed for those roles as they evolve, and where to find individuals with those skills and competencies, whether internally or externally. In addition, assessing senior leaders against external market benchmarks is a crucial strategy for identifying talent gaps and enhancing development programs. Waiting for a seat to open on the executive leadership team before having a plan to fill it – a too common practice – sends the signal that the organization is not investing in its future or that of the individuals sitting just outside the executive team.

Using a forward-looking, data-driven talent identification approach. Organizations are increasingly utilizing diverse data points and perspectives to accurately identify high-potential talent, ensuring a comprehensive understanding of who should be included in the top talent pipeline. While many organizations use manager feedback and performance reviews in creating their list of potential future leaders, the organizations with the most robust succession processes create role profiles for where the C-suite roles are headed and identify talent using a combination of 360 feedback, performance data, and psychometric assessments to give a more complete picture of the current capabilities and future potential of their next-in-line leaders.

Tailoring development plans and engaging in developmental innovation. Best-in-class organizations discern what development needs exist for next generation and current C-suite leaders, and how to address those needs. Most organizations view senior leadership development as unnecessary or only for closing observed gaps; leading organizations maintain a focus on continuous development of skills and capability at the top of the house. Leaders at these organizations benefit from more bespoke development programs, aligning technical and leadership competencies with specific roles and future experiences over a 3- to 5-year horizon to offer precise and actionable development advice. Key features include developmental-focused assessments and robust Individual Development Plans that offer clear, constructive feedback on where leaders need to stretch themselves and how to do that. In addition, forward-thinking organizations create roles and environments that support experimentation and cross-pollination, mitigating perceived risks and fostering leadership development without punitive repercussions.

Providing transparent engagement and communication. Transparent communication about investment in high-potential talent enhances motivation and retention, providing clear feedback and a forward path to reduce competition among peers. Moreover, leading organizations communicate clearly about the organization’s succession planning strategy and process, fostering trust and authenticity with their next generation C-suite leaders.

Measuring culture alignment. Measuring C-suite alignment with the rest of the organization is key to understanding how to transform the culture for future success. Organizations that are well positioned to stem the tide of next generation C-suite leader disenfranchisement know that the C-suite is often only presented with the “silver lining” when it comes to how work is really done, what gets rewarded, and what gets punished. Rather than relying on a handful of personal experiences, employee engagement survey results, and/or employee satisfaction scores, the best organizations take time to measure the current culture, define the needed culture, and develop the action plans to get from here to there     .

If we want the next generation to aspire to the C-suite, we need to make it aspirational again. That means creating a culture at the top that people admire, communicating with transparency, and committing to ongoing development.”

Former Senior Vice President for Succession Planning and Talent Management, global manufacturing company

What’s next for the next generation of leaders?

Getting ahead of the crisis of next generation C-suite leader turnover requires a multifaceted approach that combines effective succession planning, tailored and continuous development, and cultural alignment. By proactively engaging with and supporting potential leaders, organizations can ensure robust leadership pipelines and foster environments where future leaders thrive.

Authors

Miriam Capelli is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. She is based in Singapore.
Adele Farag is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. She is based in London.
Scott Smith is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in Dallas.
Peter Pickus leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment and Development Knowledge team. He is based in North Carolina.
Elizabeth Burn is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment and Development Knowledge team. She is based in Washington, D.C.
Sharon Tan is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment and Development Knowledge team. She is based in Singapore.
Joy Tan is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in New York.

References

1 Next generation C-suite leaders refer to leaders who directly report to the C-suite.

2 Source: RRA H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n= 1,369 next generation C-suite leaders

3 Source: RRA H1 2022 to H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor

4 Source: RRA H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n= 941 next generation C-suite leaders

5 Source: RRA H1 2021 to H2 2024 Leadership Confidence Index

6 Source: RRA H2 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n= 1,041 next generation C-suite leaders

7 Source: RRA H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n= 531 next generation C-suite leaders

Getting Ahead of The Looming C-Suite Succession Crisis

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices