The Future of Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Future of Leadership

The world is changing. Here’s how leadership needs to change with it.

CONNECT WITH OUR EXPERTS

CONTEXT     UNLOCKING POTENTIAL     FUTURE-READY SKILLS     HOW WE CAN HELP     OUR EXPERTS     CONTACT

Across the world, leadership turnover is at an all-time high and tenures at an all-time low. Clearly, the skills that have traditionally helped leaders ascend to the C-suite are no longer enough to help them stay there.

We set out everything you need to know about why leadership is evolving (and how), and the skills that will fuel success in a fast-changing world.

Understanding and unlocking senior executive potential is paramount

The RRA Leadership Portrait

Source: RRA proprietary research, 2024

LEARN MORE

No Company Can Outperform Its Leadership

As such, how we identify and develop the right leaders, and how we facilitate their success as a team, has never been more important.   For leaders to create the conditions for their organizations to thrive both today and in the future, we need to intentionally evolve our leadership approach to match the fast changing world around us.

The New Leadership Portrait

How can organizations understand and unlock senior executive potential?

Evolving How Organizations View Executive Potential

How can organizations identify leaders who both navigate change and keep their organizations steady? It comes down to executive potential.

Succession Stories

How to Identify the Best Leaders for a Changing World

The critical skills leaders need in a fast-changing world

Smarts, Heart, and a Belly Full of Fire

What It Really Takes to Succeed in a Volatile World

Curiosity and Adaptability

Think Leaders Need All the Answers? Think Again

Drive and Resilience

Fight or Flight: The Leaders Who Emerge Stronger From Setbacks

Social Intelligence

Walking the Stakeholder Tightrope: The Key to Effective Leadership

Systems Thinking

Overcoming Decision Paralysis: Finding Order in Chaos

Organizations need to shift their approach to identifying, assessing, and developing their leaders​

Make future-ready leadership a reality

If organizations want to win in this complex and dynamic operating environment, they’ll need a radically different understanding of what it takes to succeed as a leader. Those that do this will run circles around those that can’t—or won’t.Listen to the podcast

How we assess and develop future-ready leaders

Our Leadership Portrait approach to executive assessment and development offers a multi-dimensional view of CEOs' and CxOs' readiness for leadership roles—and their potential to thrive in a dynamic business environment.

Leadership Portrait not only allows us to identify senior leaders who are able to grow, evolve, and succeed; it also provides a roadmap for cultivating these critical skills in others, fostering a culture of continuous growth and agility throughout your organization.

Reduce the risk of hiring decisions

Use Leadership Portrait to discover leaders who are equipped to thrive in a dynamic environment. And make better, more confident leadership decisions.

Improve the odds of success of sitting executives

We help your senior leaders develop future-ready leadership skills, so they can keep pace with a fast-changing world.

Secure your succession pipelines

Backed by data,  Leadership Portrait helps you look beyond the usual suspects to find leaders who'll drive organizational performance for decades to come.

Would you like to talk to us about future-ready leadership?

Contact our Experts

Meet our Executive Assessment and Development experts

Global executive assessment leader

Erin Zolna designs and oversees leadership programs that contribute to effective CEO succession planning, M&A talent integration, hiring decisions, executive team benchmarking and leadership development.

Global executive development leader

David Lange has more than 25 years of experience of global executive development, cultural transformation, and management consulting. He focuses primarily on designing and delivering coaching and facilitation programs to CEOs and their teams.

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Ready to start your FUTURE-READY LEADERSHIP journey?

Speak to a consultant

Leadership Portrait

How can organizations understand and unlock senior executive potential?

Find out

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices