How Trailblazing Leaders Are Transforming Their Workforce | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Trailblazing Leaders Are Transforming Their Workforce

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationInclusionTransformation and InnovationCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchCulture Analytics

Article

March 18, 2025

11 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationInclusionTransformation and InnovationCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchCulture Analytics

Executive Summary

For organizations, change is no longer optional. Here’s what it takes to trailblaze the path towards workforce transformation.

Close

While change may be the only constant, the speed at which organizations must adapt to external threats has never been higher. In the face of research showing 44% of workers will need reskilling within the next five years, persisting economic and regulatory uncertainty, geopolitical uncertainty, and AI being poised to impact almost 40% of global employment, leaders are faced with a new mandate: transform your business or get left behind. And to transform one’s business often means transforming one’s workforce.

Leaders are recognizing this necessity, with 42% of leaders identifying workforce transformation as a top five threat to their organization’s health in the next 12-18 months.  Yet despite the rising importance of workforce transformation, only 38% of leaders believe that their organization is prepared to face this issue.

To better understand the workforce transformation landscape, we conducted an in-depth analysis of the ways in which leaders are approaching workforce transformation.  Our analysis revealed:

Despite strong confidence around the ability for one’s organization to transform, few feel their organization is well-adapted to change today.

Trailblazing leaders effectively transform their organizations when leading by example, instilling trust and alignment, and leveraging technology and upskilling efforts to drive change.

Leaders who are ready to embrace transformation drive better overall organizational performance.

Defining transformation

The word “transformation” has become ubiquitous in business discourse. While there are many components of business transformation—digital, cultural, operational, strategic, financial—our research explores one area of transformation: the workforce.

Specifically, our survey defined workforce transformation as the process of making significant changes to the composition, structure, responsibilities, skills, and capabilities of an organization's workforce, in order to adapt to evolving business needs and technological advancements.

Few leaders feel their workforce is prepared to transform

We asked leaders to rate the degree to which they believe their workforce can adapt for the future and their confidence in the organization’s ability to transform. Confidence is largely divided, as nearly half of leaders (49%) feel confident in the organization’s ability to transform their workforce to keep pace with changing needs, while the other half of leaders feel unsure or lack confidence in their organization’s ability to change (Figure 1).

Only

4%

of leaders believe their workforce is very well-adapted for the future.

We also observed a disconnect between leaders’ confidence in their organization’s ability to transform and workforce preparedness for the future. While the majority of leaders (46%) view their workforce as somewhat adapted and 35% think it is moderately adapted, only 4% of leaders believe their workforce is very well adapted. Meaning that despite relatively high confidence levels, only a very small group of leaders believe their workforce is truly prepared for the future.

This gap in confidence vs workforce readiness signals potential misalignment between ongoing transformation efforts and the capability for employees to meet those changes. Without the right capability, skills, and mindset, leadership may fail to adapt to changing business landscape. Leaders need to focus on investing in development, whether through upskilling, reskilling, or fostering a culture of adaptability, to close the gap between leadership confidence and workforce readiness.

Figure 1: Leadership readiness for workforce transformation

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2024, n=1821 CEOs and C-level executives

Senior leadership must embrace change and lead by example

Nearly

1 in 5

executives believe their senior leadership team needs a complete overhaul.

Which workforce function requires the most transformation? According to executives, the senior leadership team themselves. Specifically, 89% of leaders indicate that senior leadership needs to change to effectively lead in today’s business environment, and 19% of executives believe that the senior leadership team needs a complete overhaul (Figure 2). The need for change at the senior leadership level is expected as leaders today are faced with a plethora of unprecedented challenges – from economic uncertainty to talent shortages, and technological change.

Corporate functions, middle management, and other areas follow closely behind the senior leadership team demonstrating the widespread need for change. While change is needed at all levels, it must start at the top. To successfully drive transformation of the workforce, senior leadership must lead by example, ensuring that they are the first to actively participate in learning efforts and serve as champions of change. This helps set the tone for transformation to cascade throughout the rest of the organization.

Figure 2: Functions where transformation is needed, by segment
% of leaders selecting complete or some transformation needed

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2024, n=1632 CEOs and C-level executives

From stragglers to trailblazers: The four ways leaders are approaching transformation

To better understand how today’s leaders are approaching workforce transformation, we developed four distinct segments. These segments help us understand similarities and differences between leaders with varying levels of readiness for workforce transformation. Specifically, it helps us identify which behaviors are driving change and which may be causing organizations to fall behind.  The four segments include (Figure 3):

1. Stragglers (16%) – These leaders have low confidence in the organization’s ability to change in the future and feel their workforce is somewhat or minimally adapted to change today. This group struggles with adapting, often feeling stuck in traditional methods.

2. Explorers (35%) – This segment is slightly more confident in the organization’s ability to change in the future than Stragglers and has mixed feelings toward their workforce’s ability to adapt, with most indicating their workforce has somewhat adapted. While they are open to adapting, they’re unsure of their organization’s ability to effectively transform.

3. Navigators (45%) – These leaders are highly confident in the organization's ability to change for the future but feel their workforce is only moderately or somewhat adapted.  While they may be confident in their ability to change, there is still room for their workforce to evolve.

4. Trailblazers (4%) – Leaders who are highly confident in the organization's ability to change and believe their workforce is very well adapted to meet the needs of the future. While this segment is small in size, these are the pioneers of workforce transformation and the most receptive to change.

Figure 3: Leadership segments for workforce transformation
Segments derived from the degree of confidence for the organization’s ability to transform and degree which leaders believe their workforce is ready to adapt for the future

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2024, n=1813 CEOs and C-level executives

What makes a trailblazer? How these leaders are effectively transforming their workforce.

1. Trailblazers instill trust and alignment across all levels of the organization

Despite widespread agreement on the need for change, there is a marked difference among senior leaders on their ability to drive transformation. Stragglers, in particular, exhibit a false sense of confidence in their own change management abilities, despite their organization lagging behind in readiness.

Specifically, 69% of stragglers feel that they are personally managing change well, yet less than one in three stragglers feel their organization or their peers do the same. On the other hand, 93% of trailblazers feel that they are personally managing change well—and they also rate their peers highly, with 90% and 89% of trailblazers indicated their peers and the organization as a whole are managing change well (Figure 4).

This gap highlights the disconnect between how leaders perceive their own ability to manage change versus their peers or organizations as a whole. While trailblazers demonstrate alignment on both personal and organizational change management, stragglers often have an inflated sense of their own capabilities. This disconnect can hinder workforce transformation, highlighting the need for building alignment and trust within the senior leadership team and across the organization to effectively manage change and overcome differing views on change management.

Figure 4: Managing change during transformation, by segment
% of leaders selecting managing change very well or well

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2024, n=1380 CEOs and C-level executives

2. Trailblazers differentiate themselves with technology and upskilling

Successful transformation requires a holistic approach. Leaders across all four segments indicate that their organizations are actively driving change, with levers like employee surveys, performance recognition processes, and hybrid work ranking among the most widely adopted initiatives for the broader workforce.

Trailblazers are nearly

5x

more likely to be implementing upskilling efforts for the majority of employees vs stragglers.

However, trailblazers distinguish themselves through 1) their advanced progress in embracing technology resources and 2) their investments in workforce skills development. For example, 43% of trailblazers indicate that they have implemented task automation and digitization for the majority of employees, while only 11% of stragglers have implemented the same initiative.  Furthermore, 42% of trailblazers indicate they have implemented upskilling efforts vs only 8% of stragglers (Figure 5).

Though all leaders prioritize similar foundational initiatives, trailblazers and navigators engage in more advanced efforts, related to technology and skills development. Leaders must be forward-thinking, embracing both foundational and advanced transformation efforts to ensure their organizations are truly ready for the future. This balanced approach will help leaders stay ahead of the curve and foster a culture of continuous change.

Figure 5: Technology and skills initiatives implemented, by segment
% of leaders selecting ‘we have implemented this for a majority of employees’

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2024, n=1513 CEOs and C-level executives

3. High performing organizations embrace change as it happens

Trailblazers are nearly

3x

times more likely to rate their organization’s overall performance as excellent or very good compared to those with lower readiness.

The ability to continually change is a crucial characteristic for high-performing organizations today. Our data shows that the trailblazers are nearly three times more likely to rate their organization’s overall expected performance for 2024 as excellent or very good compared to those with lower readiness (Figure 6). Unsurprisingly, these leaders also report better outcomes across all our performance measures, including operational excellence innovation, financial performance, and culture (Figure 7).

Navigators are closely following in the footsteps of our trailblazers. Our research indicates that these leaders maintain strong perceptions of organizational performance, as they prioritize similar transformation priorities. For navigators to transition into trailblazers, they must continue on their current trajectory, ensuring that senior leadership actively drives transformations efforts related to technology and upskilling forward.

Those who do not embrace change in real time—explorers and stragglers—expect poorer performance. These leaders report the lowest organizational performance ratings and have made the least progress toward transformation, despite expressing the greatest need for change. While explorers slightly outperform stragglers, both groups must critically assess their leadership team's capacity to foster a culture of continuous change.

Figure 6: Overall organizational performance, by segment
% of leaders selecting excellent/very good

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2024, n=948 CEOs and C-level executives

Notably, culture plays a pivotal role in how well organizations handle workforce transformation. Trailblazers are three times more likely to rate their company culture highly (Figure 7). A strong, adaptable culture creates a foundation for continuous improvement, making organizations more resilient in the face of disruption. When leaders foster employee wellbeing and cultural alignment with transformation initiatives, they establish a framework that supports both innovation and operational excellence. As our research indicates, the organizations that excel in this area are not just surviving change—they are thriving through it.

Figure 7: Organizational performance measures, by segment
% of leaders selecting strongly agree/agree

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2024, n=948 CEOs and C-level executives

How can leaders drive workforce transformation?

In today’s fast-moving world, staying ahead requires not just responding to change, but actively driving it. With the right leadership and mindset, organizations can thrive while simultaneously steering workforce transformation. Here are three ways you can supercharge workforce transformation at your organization:

Invest in leadership to drive change: This encompasses strategically identifying and recruiting exceptional leaders who can navigate organizational challenges and lead transformative growth. It is crucial to identify high-impact leaders who not only possess the right skills, but also align with the organization’s goals, values, and vision for future growth.

Engage next-generation leaders: Empowering next-generation leaders involves providing targeted development programs that enhance their leadership capabilities and prepare them for future organizational challenges. By supporting their growth through mentorship, skill-building, and strategic transitions, companies can ensure these leaders are ready to drive impactful change and innovation in their teams and the broader organization.

Foster a strong culture: Building a strong organizational culture requires intentional strategies that align values, behaviors, and leadership to drive long-term organizational success. Through culture building, leaders can create an environment that supports collaboration, accountability, and innovation, helping them navigate transformation and thrive in dynamic markets.

Methodology

Respondents were asked to rate how well they believe their workforce is prepared for the future on a five-point scale, ranging from ‘not at all adapted’ to ‘very well adapted.’ They were also asked to assess their confidence in their organization’s ability to successfully undergo transformation, using a five-point scale from ‘very unconfident’ to ‘very confident.’ These two variables were combined to create four leadership readiness segments: Stragglers, Explorers, Navigators, and Trailblazers.

This analysis is derived from RRA’s Global Leadership Monitor, which is a global survey of boards, CEOs, CxOs, and next-generation leaders that tracks key threats to organizational health and leadership preparedness to face them.

Learn more | Methodology

Authors

Ela Buczynska and Gabrielle Lieberman of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

The authors wish to thank the thousands of leaders from RRA’s global network who responded to the Global Leadership Monitor over the last four years. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2025 and beyond.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices