AI for All: The Case for More Women Leaders in AI | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

AI for All: The Case for More Women Leaders in AI

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersTeam Performance

Article

February 11, 2025

12 min

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Women leaders are underrepresented in AI organizations, especially in tech and CEO roles. RRA explores the implications.

Close

Who’s behind your favorite AI tools? In most cases, men.

The AI transformation is shifting how we work and live, with no one knowing the full extent to which it will change our lives. AI won’t just change how we approach problem-solving—it may well change how we think. Simultaneously, leadership gender parity remains years away, with women holding less than 10% of CEO roles in the S&P 100 and the FTSE 100.

To better understand how the leadership gender diversity gap is playing out within this dynamic space, Russell Reynolds Associates took a deep dive into 39 AI application and platform organizations, analyzing the gender diversity of their senior leadership teams (see below for complete methodology). Additionally, we analyzed data from our Global Leadership Monitor, which captures the perspective of leaders across industries,  including how they are interpreting AI's potential impacts on their organizations.

Our analysis found that women leaders’ representation is equally poor within these AI-focused organizations (Figures 1 and 2), with women holding only 30% of the overall leadership roles and 10% of the CEO and top tech toles at these organizations.

Figure 1: Women leaders’ representation within AI platform and application organizations

Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, select AI platform & application organization leadership teams, 2024 (n=39 companies, 426 executives); data on executive teams was collected via company websites and LinkedIn and was categorized and analyzed in Q4 of 2024.

The majority of women leaders in these organizations are clustered in HR and legal, holding 86% and 55% of these roles, respectively (Figure 2).  These functional roles rarely hold the same level of influence as traditional “CEO feeder” roles, nor do they typically lead to the top job.

Figure 2 : Gender diversity in AI platform/application organization executive roles

Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, select AI platform & application organization leadership teams, 2024 (n=39 companies, 426 executives); data on executive teams was collected via company websites and LinkedIn and was categorized and analyzed in Q4 of 2024. Only included roles in which sample sizes were >20. Given the range of organizations analyzed, SLT size and composition varied significantly.

Surprising? Not particularly. Concerning? Absolutely.

AI’s proliferation has resulted in a complex, rapidly-changing vendor landscape that is already having massive implications for our workforce. With how quickly things are changing, we know many leaders are making decisions about this technology without fully understanding it. And leaders are even less optimistic about their organization’s accompanying direction around AI, as our Monitor found that only 27% agree that their organization has provided the right level of guidance to harness generative AI ethically and safely, and only 24% agree that they have the right processes in place to protect against AI misuse. This means that organizations are relying on AI vendors to design useful and ethical technologies with appropriate safety controls and bias mitigation and detection protocols.

The problems AI organizations face with bias in their tools is well documented. There are numerous instances of AI producing results that perpetuate stereotypes and bias in wide range of use cases, including healthcare, applicant tracking systems, online advertising, image generation, and predictive policing tools. Despite AI appearing neutral, it's made by humans. This means it internalizes and iterates on all the same biases we have - including gender bias.

But what we are talking about goes beyond distasteful or comically incorrect outputs. AI tools and their forebearers are applied to decisions that have real world consequences for individuals and communities – be that decisions on job applications, mortgage and loan applications, or healthcare.  As such, the leaders of AI organizations wield a huge level of influence. With that comes great responsibility.

Large Language Models (LLMs) are trained on vast existing data sets designed to represent natural language and function. But historically,   data collection has centered men’s experience and overlooked women. This male centricity is rarely deliberate—it’s typically the function of cost, convenience, or a simple lack of consideration. But whether intentional or not,  biased product design (stemming from incomplete or inaccurate data sets) has resulted in serious disadvantages for women and their wellbeing, impacting:

Medicine &
Health Outcomes

In 2020, only 1% of healthcare research and innovation was invested in female-specific conditions beyond oncology.

This lack of data negatively impacts women’s health outcomes by failing to address the female body specifically,
resulting in women spending 25% more of their lives in debilitating health than men.

Vehicular Safety

Many safety standards and policies are designed on the assumption that women are just smaller versions of men—a concept called the “Henry Higgins Effect.”

For example, car crash dummies have historically been built to mimic men’s bodies. While men are more likely to crash, women involved in collisions are 47% more likely to be seriously hurt, and 17% more likely to die.

Equipment Design

Most personal protective equipment (PPE) is based on the sizes and characteristics of male populations from Europe and the US. However, using a “standard” US male face shape for dust, hazard and eye masks means PPE doesn’t fit most women (as well as many black and minority ethnic men).

A 2017 TUC report found that only 5% of women in emergency services said that their PPE never hampered their work, with body armor, stab vests, hi-vis vests and jackets all highlighted as unsuitable.

For more on the adverse effects on women caused by the gender bias in big data collection, see Caroline Criado Perez’ Invisible Women: Data Bias in a World Designed for Men, New York, NY: Abrams Press, 2019.

AI can help us guard against repeating these issues – but only if designed with the appropriate guardrails, and with input from everyone it aims to reflect and protect. While improved gender balance in leadership teams is by no means a silver bullet, an organization’s leadership helps shape those safeguards, answer big questions around where their company should focus, and outline what problems they’re aiming to solve with this technology.

Low representation in technology functions leads to few women in top roles at AI organizations

This lack of representation doesn’t take away from the impactful and groundbreaking work that current women leaders are doing in this space – for example: Fei Fei Li  (Stanford University), Mira Murati (former CTO, OpenAI), Daniela Amodei (President, Anthropic), Melanie Perkins (CEO, Canva), Lila Ibrahim (COO, Deepmind), to name just a few.

While every senior leadership role is important to a company’s healthy functioning, if AI is to truly meet the future needs of society, more balanced gender representation in its technical design and governance will be critical to stopping the perpetuation of unintended and embedded gender biases.

But currently, women leaders are severely underrepresented in technology leadership roles in AI companies, holding a mere 22% of the product, engineering, and science roles observed (Figures 2 and 3). And we observed only four women CEOs and four women CTOs across these 39 organizations.

Figure 3: Women leaders’ representation in select key roles at AI organization

Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, select AI platform & application organization leadership teams, 2024 (n=39 companies, 426 executives); data on executive teams was collected via company websites and LinkedIn and was categorized and analyzed in Q4 of 2024.

While the small sample size makes broad conclusions difficult, our findings suggest that when women helm AI companies and/or their tech teams, they’re more likely to achieve gender-balanced leadership. Of the four women-led AI organizations we examined, two have achieved gender parity and three are more gender diverse than the average AI leadership team (meaning their senior leadership teams are comprised of over 30% women.)

Conspicuous in their absence: Only two AI organizations have achieved gender parity on their leadership team

While it’s important to understand gender representation across AI’s overall executive population, it’s perhaps even more crucial to understand how it varies between organizations. With that, we also analyzed the leadership teams of these 39 AI platform and application organizations.

As of Q4 2024, four of these organizations’ senior leadership teams were comprised of all men, and seven have only one woman executive onboard (Figure 4). Nineteen of these C-suites have less than 25% women, and 30 are comprised of less than one-third women.

Only two of the 39 organizations analyzed have senior leadership teams comprised of over 50% women. As noted above, both of these organizations are led by women.

Figure 4: AI platform/application leadership team gender diversity snapshot

Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, select AI platform & application organization leadership teams, 2024 (n=39 companies, 411 executives – noting execs listed on organization’s website ONLY); data on executive teams was collected via company websites and LinkedIn and was categorized and analyzed in Q4 of 2024.

Less represented, but more concerned: Women leaders are generally more worried about AI’s societal risks than their male counterparts

According to RRA’s Global Leadership Monitor, which gathers perspective from leaders across industries, women leaders at every level (next generation, C-suite, CEO, and board directors) are more likely to be concerned about AI’s most pressing issues in the workplace, including misinformation perpetuation and introducing bias into talent processes (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Women leaders across levels are more likely to express concern about AI’s societal impacts

Source: RRA H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,432 board, C-level, CEO, and next gen leaders, 2024.

Source: RRA H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=124 C-suite women, 315 C-suite men

It stands to reason that women leaders – who’ve likely had to contend with more gender bias throughout their careers than men – would be more attuned to AI’s bias risks, and why they’re more likely to be in favor of stronger regulation to ensure its safe use.

We’ve already seen many generative AI product launches miss the mark with women and underrepresented minority groups, resulting in embarrassing claw backs for their organizations. Given what we know about women leaders’ poor representation in AI organizations—particularly in roles that influence product design—one has to wonder if these missteps could have been avoided if more individuals who were keener on asking tough questions about bias and misinformation mitigations were in the room during the tool’s creation. Of course, this is not simply a question of representation, but also one of capability and organizational culture.

What’s next in the journey towards AI for all?

While bias may be an inescapable fact of life, it does not need to be an unavoidable aspect of new technologies. In fact, when designed thoughtfully, these technologies can help us solve these issues. While there are many steps AI organizations can take to ensure this outcome, ensuring that their leaders represent everyone for whom they’re developing this tech is key.

No company can outperform its leadership. And research has long shown that gender-balanced leadership teams produce better outcomes.  Findings from our RRA Artemis movement indicate that the holistic way in which women leaders approach problem-solving and leadership is even more important in the increasingly volatile landscape of work. For technology organizations aiming to tap into the power of AI for all via their leadership teams, consider the following.

Start succession planning early: Our research shows that, despite being equally effective, women are less likely to believe they’re qualified for leadership roles, as they tend to underestimate their skills. Counteract this and AI’s leaky tech leadership pipeline by inviting women into the process early and often. Not only will this help broaden the pool of next generation women leaders, when all qualified applicants know of and are in the running for leadership positions, it sends the message that everyone is capable and under consideration.

Equip senior leaders to address common biases in the talent identification and succession process to transform CEO succession pipelines: Review the language around the objectives and competencies, bearing in mind that women are primarily motivated by impact (compared to status, pay, etc.) Related, ensure assessment teams truly understand—and value—men and women’s different experiences and motivations at work.

Leverage AI itself to accelerate equitable outcomes: AI organizational leaders can embed equity steps into the talent sourcing process by leveraging AI to identify a wide range of participants, efficiently scan the relevant employee population, systematically assess applicants by matching assessment data with future potential roles, and tabulate individual calibrations to provide a selection recommendation that is not influenced by group-think. Additionally, leaders can leverage AI tools to quickly understand if different populations are being hired, retained, and promoted at comparable levels, thus empowering them to make leadership succession pipelines more equitable.

Consider external development programs and joining communities of like-minded leaders: Sometimes, internal mentorship and advocacy is not enough to expose next-generation leaders to the range of experience required to progress to the next level. When this happens, consider investing in external development programs for leaders who are historically underrepresented in your industry. Additionally, joining a community of like-minded tech leaders offers opportunities for all leaders to discuss inclusive strategies and better outcomes. This allows leaders to network with their peers, gain new understanding that benefits both them and the business, and shows top performers that their organization is willing to invest in them for the long haul.

Addressing the AI leadership gender gap requires tackling gender bias and discrimination through inclusion training, raising awareness of women's contributions to the field, and actively working to diversify tech and P&L succession pipelines. Male allies can help by promoting more inclusive recruitment and retention initiatives, and by amplifying women’s voices in AI.

Methodology

What we analyzed

We analyzed 39 AI application (vertical applications, creative consumer applications, and general productivity enterprise applications) and platform (cloud data platforms, foundational model developers, AI developer tools, AI software solutions) organizations. Most of these organizations are based in the United States, but organizations based in the United Kingdom, Europe, and China are also represented.

Data was collected in September-October of 2024 and analyzed in November 2024. Note that with the industry’s high volatility (e.g., three senior leaders left Open AI during the data collection process), leaders in this space are changing roles faster than the industry average. We make every attempt to ensure data accuracy at the time of analysis, but cannot account for every role change that occurs post data collection.

What we didn’t analyze

We did not include hardware organizations that are manufacturing the chips that power AI. While these organizations are pivotal to the development of AI, they are less involved in the design of AI outputs, meaning the gender diversity of these senior leadership teams is less relevant for this discussion.

However, addressing the gender gap within these organizations is crucial to overall gender diversity within the tech space. And with external research suggesting that chip companies like Nvidia and Intel also face a gender gap amidst the AI boom, this warrants further study.

We did not analyze ethnic diversity as part of this study, due to GDPR and other privacy laws that limit data collection of this type. However, ethnic diversity is a crucial piece of the parity puzzle and AI’s product design. This important topic also warrants further study.

Identifying gender

Gender data comes from Boardex, LinkedIn, and company websites. Due to the sensitivity and complexity of this data, no data is reported on individuals and all data is analyzed and reported in the aggregate. If not explicitly self-identified, the gender of members included in this analysis has been inferred either by the pronouns used on their LinkedIn profiles or by the basis of first name. Members whose gender could not be inferred as either men or women were excluded from this analysis.

Mapping job/role types

Our data sources (Boardex, LinkedIn, and company websites) provide information on each executive's job title and responsibilities. However, there is a high degree of variability in that information, which is both a facet of differences in specific job titles for common functional roles and differences in organizational structures and between industries.

We designed a role categorization process whereby each executive was tagged to a specific role. In some instances, only one executive in each company could be tagged to the role, while in other instances multiple individuals could be tagged to the same role category. See the below table for more details.

CEO: Multiple allowed to account for co-CEOs

CFO, CHRO, CMO, COO, GC, COO: Only one person per company listed (if role exists).

CIO/CTO: Multiple allowed in specific cases where there is a clear separation between Corporate IT (CIO) and Technology roles.

Strategy: Multiple allowed. Category includes Corporate Development. R&D and Innovation roles categorized in Product/Engineering.

Commercial: Multiple allowed. Category includes merchandizing, and Customer roles (unless they have a very clear product/engineering orientation).

Other Functional Leadership: Any functional roles not caught in the above buckets. These are often sub-function roles (e.g., Treasury, which is part of Finance) or roles that are just less common at this level e.g., Comms, Corporate Affairs.

Operations/Supply Chain/Logistics: Multiple allowed. Category covers supply chain roles, logistics, and operations roles in banks and retail organizations etc.

Product/Engineering/Science: This category covers any roles that clearly relate to the development/creation of the product itself. Quality roles belong here, as do innovation and R&D roles. Analysis includes heads of Generative AI at large tech organizations leading product development who are not listed as part of an organization’s ELT.

P&L Leaders: Individuals that run business units, regions, or lines of business.

Additionally, we analyzed data from RRA’s H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, which is an online survey of executives and non-executives that gathers the perspective of leaders on the impact of external trends on organizational health and their leadership implications (first launched in 2021). Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed its global network of executives using an online/mobile survey from 4 March to April 1 2024. Data from previous Global Leadership Monitor surveys were deployed in February/March 2021, March 2022, October 2022, March 2023, and September/October 2023.

Authors

Leah Christianson and Tom Handcock of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

LEARN MORE ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND THE CENTER FOR LEADERSHIP INSIGHT

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the following contributors from Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology and Board & CEO Advisory practices for their time and valuable perspectives:

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.

David Finke is a senior member of the firm’s Technology and Board & CEO Advisory practices. He is based in Palo Alto.

Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory practice in the Americas, and is the co-founder of RRA Artemis. She is based in San Francisco.

Hetty Pye is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory practice, and is the co-founder of RRA Artemis. She is based in London.

Tuck Rickards is a senior member and former leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in San Francisco.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices