Record Turnover in F500 GC Ranks: New Appointees Implementing Major Change | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Record Turnover in F500 GC Ranks: New Appointees Implementing Major Change

SuccessionLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Article

March 31, 2025

9 min

SuccessionLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Internal appointments are on the rise across the Fortune 500 general counsel landscape. Read on to learn why.

Close

Cynthia Dow

Stamford

William McKinnon

Washington DC

Russell Reynolds Associates’ fifth annual analysis of this year’s cohort of Fortune 500 general counsel shows that:

General counsel turnover is at its highest since 2018, with 70 new GC appointments in 2024.

In a departure from previous years, the majority of these GC appointments are internal to the organization.

The volatile external risk environment, as well as the significant churn in recent external general counsel appointments, may be prompting companies to focus more on internal succession planning.

When asked about the level of change implemented in their new role on a scale of zero (business as usual) to ten (complete overhaul), the most common answer given by GCs was seven out of ten.

Companies are preparing their internal successors by giving them broad exposure to legal, regulatory, and corporate affairs as well as crisis management and even non-legal responsibilities before they step into the top job.

Methodology

The analysis in this piece is based on the Fortune 500 GCs in role as of December 31, 2024, and includes 487 general counsel. We have also drawn on previous Fortune 500 studies for comparative purposes. Primary sources for analysis are BoardEx, LinkedIn, and company websites.

The latest cohort includes all sectors, including consumer (22%), financial services (19%), healthcare (9%), industrial and natural resources (38%), and technology (12%).

We surveyed 30 general counsel who were appointed to new roles in Fortune 500 companies in 2023 and 2024 to ask them about their experiences and why they were selected for their roles.

We interviewed 15 Fortune 500 GCs who were appointed within the last two years to ask them about their path to their role, life as a newly appointed GC in a major company, and their advice for those aspiring to follow them.

A record year for general counsel appointments in the Fortune 500

2024 saw the highest number of newly appointed general counsel in the Fortune 500 since we started tracking back in 2018 (Figure 1). Of the 70 appointed, 54% are first time, internal candidates, marking a shift towards favoring internal successors (Figures 2 and 3). Although a slim majority, it mirrors a broader trend in executive turnover: our CEO, CFO, and CHRO indices all see a shift towards internal appointments.

Figure 1: Newly appointed general counsel in the Fortune 500 (2018-2024)

Source: RRA analysis of newly appointed Fortune 500 GCs, 2018 - 2024, n = as detailed above.

Figure 2: Proportion of internal and external GC appointments (2020 – 2024)

Source: RRA analysis of newly appointed Fortune 500 GCs, 2024, n = 59 in 2018, n = 66 in 2019, n = 52 in 2020, n = 59 in 2021, n = 42 in 2022, n = 66 in 2023, n = 70 in 2024.

Figure 3: Profile of newly appointed general counsel in the Fortune 500 in 2024
Sales

Source: RRA  analysis of newly appointed Fortune 500 GCs in 2024, n = 70 in 2024.

What’s more, when Fortune 500 companies did look externally to the market, they tended to hire GCs with prior role experience within the same industry: of the 32 externally appointed GCs in 2024, 59% moved within the same industry and 75% were experienced GCs.

Short tenure and risk aversion is driving more internal GC appointments

Why do we see a shift towards internal successors? One reason may be the high proportion of recent GC appointments that ended after relatively short tenures. Of the 2022 leavers, 17% served less than five years in seat.  By 2023, that proportion increased to 25%, and hit 28% in 2024 (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Fortune 500 GC leaver tenure (2022 - 2024)
Shading indicates year appointed and year GC left post.

Source: RRA analysis of Fortune 500 GC tenure, 2022-2024. N = 35 in 2022, N = 71 in 2023, N = 61 in 2024 (interims removed).

Notably, 71% of those 2024 leavers were originally external hires—a significant 12pp increase from the year prior (Figure 5).

Figure 5: GCs who left their roles within five years: Internal vs external appointments (2022 - 2024)

Source: RRA analysis of Fortune 500 GC tenure, 2022-2024. N = 6 in 2022, N = 17 in 2023, N = 17 in 2024 (interims removed).

In response, many companies are moving towards “the general counsel they know.” Of the organizations that hired external GCs who exited within five years, 52% went on to appoint an internal successor.

The unprecedented disruption wrought by the pandemic coupled with the challenges of building relationships in a hybrid environment is likely to have played a role in some external hires not working out, underlining the need for contingency plans and a pipeline of internal talent ready to take the reins.

It's also likely that companies are seeking to limit how much their newly appointed general counsel has to learn. In our current volatile risk environment, internal successors’ existing  operations and stakeholder knowledge may have an edge over an external appointment’s fresh perspective. Nurturing an internal rising star means skipping the steep learning curve that would come with making an external appointment.

27%

of sitting Fortune 500 general counsel are external hires within the last five years.

Even when making an external appointment, companies are trying to control for consistency. As we note above, the most common external GC hire profile brought industry and role experience. While these new GCs had to learn the intricacies of their new company, they still had the benefit of industry wisdom and boardroom exposure under their belts.

Lastly, trends within the talent market are likely also prompting Fortune 500 companies to take a longer-term, strategic approach to succession planning. Twenty-seven percent of the sitting Fortune 500 GCs are external hires within the last five years. On top of that, 20% have been in role for ten years or more, and are therefore highly embedded in their organization. This leaves just 26% in the sweet spot of between five and ten years in role who may be open to new opportunities. If organizations are looking to recruit a sitting chief legal officer, the pool of talent realistically available and open to changing positions is much smaller than during times when there is less movement. With the external talent market somewhat exhausted, Fortune 500 companies are investing more in the rising stars they already employ.

New GCs are making major changes

Although Fortune 500 companies are being more cautious in selecting their general counsel, it doesn’t mean they are change-averse. In fact, the newly appointed general counsel we interviewed say they have a strong mandate for change. When asked to rate the changes they have made in their first 12 to 18 months in role on a scale of zero (business as usual) to ten (a complete overhaul), the most common answer given was a seven. This was consistent regardless of whether the GC was an internal or external appointment.

Assessing their teams and culture was a top priority for all general counsel, irrespective of their path to the top job. Some described shifting mindsets from transactional approaches to partnering with the business, requiring the replacement of more technically-minded team members with those of a more commercial outlook. Others described a need to shift the focus of departments away from simply managing the docket to thinking strategically about how legal teams contribute to a company’s objectives. Another common thread was the need to embrace technological change, such as automation, becoming more data-driven, and enhancing technology competence for more effective operations.

Most GCs allowed themselves an initial assessment period of around six months to understand the organization, teams, and culture before implementing significant changes. However, they didn’t hold back in making immediate changes on urgent issues: where there were clear opportunities for improvement, pressing challenges, or opportunities to be seized, new general counsel moved quickly. In cases where there were immediate performance issues or clear misalignments with the team’s future direction, GCs acted swiftly to switch up direct reports to align the team with strategic objectives.

Broad experience and spotlight projects help internal legal talent step-up

When we asked newly appointed general counsel to rank the experiences that were most meaningful to their ultimate hiring, we uncovered noteworthy differences between internal and external appointments.

External appointments were most likely to say that their experience in navigating the boardroom and advising on governance was the most important reason they were selected (Figure 6).

Internal appointments, on the other hand, say their experience managing litigation, risk and other external affairs was most important. Their boardroom navigation, commercial partnering, track record in complex global environments, and ability to lead high performing teams were all closely-bunched secondary factors (Figure 6). In other words, their broad functional competence—proven within the context of their organization—was the most important factor in their selection.

Figure 6: Most important experiences prior to appointment ranked by general counsel - Internal and external appointments
GCs ranking, “At the time of your selection, which aspect of your experience was valued most highly or was the most critical?”
The higher the score, the higher each factor was ranked on average.

Source: RRA survey of newly appointed Fortune 500 GCs in 2023 and 2024, n = 30.

Despite being the second-most important reason why internal successors are appointed, few say they have extensive exposure to working with the board and advising on governance. Just 36% of internally appointed GCs rated their board exposure as extensive or in every meeting, in stark contrast with the 74% of externally appointed GCs who say the same (Figure 7).

Figure 7: How GCs rated their board exposure prior to appointment – Internal versus external
# of GCs answering, “Prior to obtaining the role, how would you rate your board exposure?”

Source: RRA survey of newly appointed Fortune 500 GCs in 2023 and 2024, n = 30.

This points to the importance of quality (rather than frequent) interactions with the board for high-potential legal talent. When asked qualitatively what their most important development opportunities were in their path to succession, internal GCs talked about stretch projects with broad scope that gave them exposure to their senior stakeholders and a chance to demonstrate their strategic credentials as business leaders, rather than simply as functional experts.

What’s next for the Fortune 500 general counsel landscape?

High churn in the last five years means the external GC talent pool is smaller than ever: Attracting a superstar GC from another company is an increasingly difficult task, as so many GCs moved in the last five years. If you are set on making an external appointment, it’s a candidate’s market.

Consider the context: Where tenure has been short, consider what lessons can be learned when hiring your next General Counsel. What were the biggest hurdles to success in the role? Are you hiring a GC with a mandate for change or continuity? Whether you’re prioritizing boardroom presence or internal relationships, it will impact your future GC profile.

Succession planning takes years—it’s never too early to start: To be successful, rotation and exposure is critical for high potential talent. Possible internal appointees need to gain a breadth of experience in litigation, risk, regulatory affairs and other adjacent areas. Furthermore, they need opportunities to own and drive complex projects in global environments that give them C-level and board exposure. All of this is likely to take years, to organize and execute, so it makes sense for sitting GCs to start succession planning as soon as possible. A key question for organizations is whether they have the time and resources to create these significant rotation opportunities to foster the bench strength required.

Ensure a structured selection process—whether appointing internally or externally: Whether considering internal or external candidates, rigorous executive assessment has many benefits. Internal candidates can sometimes suffer from familiarity bias—stakeholders may think they already know the candidate’s track record. By going through a structured process, internal candidates get the opportunity to shine by presenting their accomplishments and benchmarking against the wider market.

Whether assessing talent internally or going out to the market, robust assessment of candidates’ experiences and competencies—as well as their future potential—really matter in helping companies understand the nuances of a particular leader’s style. Structured assessments like RRA’s Leadership Portrait model can help organizations understand both a leader’s ability to succeed today, as well as their potential to lead the organization through the inevitable change and transformation that sits on the horizon.

As roles continues to expand and external volatility remains high, examining a candidate’s potential to grow, grapple with complexity, and support your organization’s culture—as well as how they benchmark against the wider market—are all crucial for successfully hiring your next general counsel.

Authors

Cynthia Dow is a senior member of Russell Reynold’s Associates’ Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers capability. She is based in Boston.
William McKinnon is a senior member of Russell Reynold’s Associates’ Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers capability. He is based in Washington D.C.
Alison Huntington leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers Knowledge team. She is based in London.
Jason Kipkala is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers Knowledge team. He is based in Toronto.
Kunal Khanna is a member of the Data Services Team at WNS serving Russell Reynolds Associates’ Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers capability. He is based in New Delhi.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices