Getting a Head Start in Your New CHRO Role | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Getting a Head Start in Your New CHRO Role

Career TransitionsHuman Resources OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Article

+ 3 authors

February 14, 2025

11 min

Career TransitionsHuman Resources OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

We spoke with 21 global CHROs who offer their advice for new-in-role CHROs.

Close

Maddy Butts

New York

Marcy Calaway

Chicago

Lilly Lin

Chicago

Sarah Lucas Ruhland

San Francisco

Ted Moore

Chicago

Amelia Reid

London

CHROs' roles’ and responsibilities are broadening, as the workforce is increasingly seen as an organization’s most important strategic differentiator. Getting the most out of people means finding a common purpose that motivates, inspires, and enables a company to embrace critical change.

CHROs today are far more involved with the most senior stakeholders, acting as the connective tissue between the board, CEO, and wider C-suite on highly sensitive topics, such as succession and executive compensation. Additionally, new responsibilities are falling under the CHRO’s remit, ranging from organizational transformation, corporate communications, and sustainability (Figure 1).

For first-time CHROs, this new context of navigating from a specialized role to a much broader one with a strategic seat at the CEO’s table often proves challenging. But even for seasoned CHROs, the changing expectations and elevation of the role means there’s a lot to balance.

To help CHROs navigate this shifting context, we interviewed 21 CHROs across the globe, asking them for practical advice for incoming CHROs during their first year in a new role. Here’s what they shared – and when to act.

Figure 1: Almost one in five incoming CHROs have responsibilities beyond ‘traditional’ HR roles

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Q3 2024 CHRO Turnover Index, n = 1,822.

Before you start

Ask for feedback to unlock your leadership potential:

You’ll likely have already received feedback during the rigorous assessment process to win the top job. However, that’s only one piece of the puzzle – you also need to align with your CEO around a common understanding of your leadership strengths and development areas. Leadership advisors can help facilitate these alignment conversations via informal discussions or more structured assessments (for example, RRA’s Leadership Portrait model). Creating this alignment allows you to start your new position knowing where to focus, develop a plan to fill any existing gaps, and allows for ample time to reflect on actioning development recommendations in a sustainable way.

Deepen your understanding of HR’s “brand” within the organization:

In addition to keeping up to date with the latest industry trends and competitor intelligence, taking the time to understand how HR is perceived in your new organization will pay dividends. Find one-to-one time with each of the “core” HR functions and pick the brains of HR business partners, who are often closer to the business than those in more specific HR verticals.

Additionally, lean on outside resources with a strategic perspective on the organization; external consultants and leadership advisors with a healthy detachment from the company’s day-to-day will have a different point of view from those living and breathing its HR function. Several interviewees shared that they arranged trainings on their front-line workers’ experiences, so as to better understand their workforce’s responsibilities and what they deal with every day. These perspectives will help inform your assessment of the current HR function, its key stakeholders, and how it contributes to (and is viewed by) the organization.

Finally, have a direct discussion with your CEO to ensure alignment around their vision for the HR function. Get crystal clear on their expectations for you, and how the two of you will work together to lead the organization’s workforce.

Start building your relationships with the CEO, C-suite, and board:

It’s never too early to start building relationships with senior stakeholders. This helps you understand the business and its challenges, while also raising your profile and building both your confidence and their confidence in you.

Your top priority should be establishing trust with your CEO, as many in the top job find the CHRO to be a useful confidant. Additionally, learning the board’s views around talent is key. Consider establishing a regular touchpoint with your talent and compensation board member.

If you don’t have existing connections with important internal stakeholders, lean on other executives, board members, or leadership consultants to make introductions. Understanding these personalities and dynamics will be critical to your success in the new role, and engaging early gives you more time to understand the stakeholder landscape.

Build a trusted external network:

While other functions may lean on you, confide in you, or even rage at you, HR leaders cannot do the same to others. That can leave those new-in-role feeling lonely, and many interviewees commented on the self-reliance HR leadership requires.

“For me, the biggest change was that I needed my own network,” noted one CHRO interviewee. “I needed places to go where I could be vulnerable, because it’s so difficult in this job to say, ‘I don’t know,’ or have a trusted conversation with a boss. When you’re in the number two role, that support infrastructure is there for you. But when you step up, you need to proactively build it on your own.”

To counteract this, invest in building community with other CHROs. This can be achieved through topical industry events or formalized mentoring programs with seasoned CHROs. Consider how additional board roles could play a part in building your personal network.

The first 90 days

Embark on a listening tour:

Prepare to rack up the airmiles: almost all of the CHROs we spoke with went on an in-person “listening tour” across the regions and functions for which they are responsible. Meeting face-to-face builds trust, helps you to better understand the culture, and, as one CHRO put it, humanizes you and “shows you’re not ‘big bad HR.’”

Our interviewees stressed the importance of just listening, rather than talking. Hearing multiple perspectives enables you to triangulate different points of view and assess perceptions around what HR is (and isn’t) good at. It’ll also enable you to really get to know the business, the culture, and how HR can add strategic value; seven of our 21 interviewees said that understanding the business and building relationships was their top priority when starting their new role (Figure 2).

Assess your team’s strengths and weaknesses:

“I don’t have the time to run HR like I used to,” observed one CHRO, referring to how much the top job has broadened in recent years. A CHRO needs a strong team leading each of the key pillars on their team – with today’s volatile environment, it’s not possible for you to carry any weak links.

“If you walk into an organization and your ‘next level’ is not where it should be, you’ve got burnout coming,” warned another CHRO. “You need to make sure that the next level is up to speed and gives you a strong safety net.”

To avoid this outcome, quickly determine which areas need changing, where you can nurture and develop talent, and who your rising stars are. Many interviewees listed “assessing and restructuring HR team” as their top priority when stepping into the role, and even more named this as their second priority (Figure 2). They emphasized the importance of team members who can manage and integrate the different HR functions effectively, who can be trusted to nurture crucial relationships, and who can be entrusted to be cultural stewards within the organization.

Sell your vision and celebrate quick wins:

Having connected with key stakeholders and heard multiple perspectives, outline your plan in a way that engages people.

“Dazzle the board,” said one CHRO. “Be really clear about your focus areas. Tell a cogent story about the initial state of the business, what progress you’ve made, and your future goals. Leverage data, but don’t let it overwhelm. It’s about clarity and building confidence.”

Use these opportunities to demonstrate how HR can support and enhance the business’s strategic priorities, while also pointing to quick wins that make immediate business impact. We heard from a CHRO whose rapidly growing company’s lack of HR basics needed addressing; another spoke of restructuring all-hands meetings and internal communications for visible, immediate impact; another advised shutting down existing initiatives that aren’t delivering tangible value.

Figure 2: Top priorities for new-in-role CHROs

Source: RRA proprietary CHRO interviews, 2024, n = 21.

From three to nine months

Maintain a laser focus on what only the CHRO can do:

CHROs today spend the bulk of their time outside the “core” HR remit. “I spend at most 20% of my time in my own function,” said one CHRO. “I spend the rest of my time with the CEO, the board, and the rest of the C-suite.”

As CHRO, you will handle the most sensitive issues your organization deals with: succession planning, including for the CEO; executive compensation; hiring or managing out other leaders in crucial positions; long-term workforce planning; interacting with the board; and managing relationships with potential for power struggles at the very highest levels. As CHRO, you are uniquely positioned to build consensus and mediate through conflict by remaining independent and keeping the organization’s best interests at the forefront.

Build your team around what you need to achieve:

76%

of the CHROs interviewed recommended that new-in-role CHROs make changes within their team in the first six months of their tenure (Figure 3).

With so much on your plate, you need to ensure the team beneath you can take care of running the HR function. By this point, you’ll know your priorities and what the organization needs from your team, and whether you need to restructure or change reporting lines. Ensure you have the talent you need to help you achieve the areas of focus—whether that’s a culture shift or a talent reboot—and don’t be afraid to make changes. If you sense that you need to make several changes, one CHRO offered the following advice: “Figure out where you can afford not to have the very best talent versus the areas where you absolutely need top performers. Act fast and be very, very selective when hiring, especially for those key areas.”

Make changes to your team sooner rather than later:

If you feel that there’s tension or things aren’t working with members of your team, it’s better to act quickly and decisively. Many CHROs told us that, when they stalled for the perfect moment to have tough conversations, they regretted waiting so long. Most (76%) of the CHROs interviewed recommended that new-in-role CHROs make changes within their team in the first six months of their tenure (Figure 3).

Figure 3: CHROs agree on making changes to the team quickly—16 of 21 CHROs advise doing so in the first 6 months

Source: RRA proprietary CHRO interviews, 2024, n = 21.

Within the first year

Embed data-driven decision-making into succession processes:

CHROs can demonstrate their value by bringing objective assessment tools and frameworks to succession conversations. You have expertise that your peers and senior stakeholders are unlikely to have, meaning you can establish yourself as someone who brings expert insights, facilitates communication, and builds consensus and trust between those with differing views.

Become a trusted advisor:

Use your first year to build trust with your senior stakeholders—and, most importantly, your CEO—by providing honest, insightful counsel. This includes having candid conversations, being brave enough to address issues directly, and using data and experience to advise others. All of this will build your credibility as a strategic partner and an essential facilitator of communication that makes the entire leadership team work better together.

Regularly communicate and measure the impact of your initiatives:

Ensure you establish a regular communication cadence with the CEO, C-suite, and board. In these conversations, demonstrate the impact of your work and how it aligns with the business strategy. Whenever possible, link it to financial performance, external benchmarks, or other metrics to measure the value of HR. Avoid using HR jargon; use plain speech that connects with other executive leaders.

Ensuring you get the airtime you need can be tough. One CHRO described pushing back when the board overran on other topics, saying directly, “I’m not going to cover the people strategy in five minutes – it’s too important.” Pointing to HR’s strategic impact helps tell your story, and makes it harder to dismiss as unimportant.

Enduring advice for CHROs

When asked to reflect on what advice they would give to new-in-role CHROs and aspiring CHROs, regardless of where they are in their careers, our interviewees agreed on three things:

Emotional resilience is key: Stepping into the top role means handling sensitive, potentially emotionally-charged situations. There will be egos, politics, and complex dynamics to navigate, so learning to manage your own emotions and remain objective will help you cope with these challenges. Having an external network can be especially helpful to CHROs—who often can’t share their burdens within their own organizations—and can help those new-in-role to gain confidence and act quickly. Having a sounding board can quiet the doubtful voices and help you “make it” instead of “fake it.”

Learn to balance listening and decisive action: New-in-role CHROs need to spend time listening to build trust and inform decision-making. However, knowing when you’ve heard enough to act is critical. Demonstrating that you can implement change and drive the organization forward is critical to building credibility in your first year.

Develop a broad skillset early: We consistently hear and observe the breadth of the HR role. Those aspiring to be future CHROs should cultivate a broad skillset early and look for opportunities to gain exposure to a range of HR functions. Seek out rotational opportunities or regional HR business partner roles that, by their nature, demand a broad focus.

Authors

Maddy Butts is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources capability. She is based in New York.
Marcy Calaway is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice with a focus on human resources officers. She is based in Chicago.
Lilly Lin is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice with a focus on assessing and developing human resources officers and partnering with them in their succession planning efforts. She is based in Chicago.
Sarah Lucas Ruhland is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources capability. She is based in San Francisco.
Ted Moore leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources capability in the Americas. He is based in Chicago.
Amelia Reid is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources capability. She is based in London.
Brad Pugh is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers capability. He is based in Atlanta.
Alison Huntington leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers and Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers Knowledge teams. She is based in London.
Jason Kipkala is the Commercial Operations Leader for Russell Reynolds’ Global Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers and Human Resources Officers capabilities. He is based in Toronto.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices