What Makes a Successful Healthtech CEO in 2025? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Makes a Successful Healthtech CEO in 2025?

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsVenture Capital and GrowthPrivate CapitalHealthcareTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Article

Noël Auguston

February 20, 2025

3 min

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsVenture Capital and GrowthPrivate CapitalHealthcareTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Executive Summary

RRA research of HealthTech CEOs finds prior CEO or healthcare experience are not required for a successful exit, but multifunctional experience is.

Close

Noël Auguston

Boston

In 2024, the healthtech industry saw notable developments in PE activity (e.g., New Mountain Capital’s Payment Integrity merger), public market activity (e.g., Tempus and Waystar IPOs), and generative AI-bolstered fundraising. Nevertheless, overall market conditions remained dampened relative to prior years, and holding periods continued to be lengthened.

Early signals form late 2024 show  improving market conditions for healthtech with an increase in deal flow activity, although Healthtech investors are likely to continue to encounter a dynamic environment for 2025. Much of this will be driven by the continued disruption by generative AI, constrained capital environment as investors continue to monitor interest rates, changing political landscapes, and a continued tight market for executive talent. As such, healthtech organizations will need to continue to think critically about who is best equipped to lead them through this uncertainty—particularly at the CEO level. Answering the question, “what problem are we trying to solve for” has never been more important for investors and boards to address.

Board and CEO work makes up over a third of RRA’s healthtech practice’s search and advisory work, and through conversations with investors and boards, we’ve found one of the top questions to be: ‘What are key experiences that make a CEO successful in the healthtech space?’

At the beginning of 2024, Russell Reynolds Associates launched its inaugural research of healthtech CEOs with successful exits in order to help leaders identify the CEOs best equipped for success in 2024. We studied the functional and industry backgrounds of those companies’ CEOs, uncovering key insights about their leadership profiles and routes to the top. In the second year of our study, we expanded our analysis to include insights based on 270+ placements of healthtech leaders over the past four years and 60 top healthtech exits* (public and private companies) since 2015.

Even though market dynamics changed, 2024 highlighted consistency in the profile of CEOs with successful exits in line with 2023 findings:

Prior CEO experience is not required for success: 62% of healthtech CEOs with a successful exit or significant revenue achievement were first timers in the role.

Given market complexity and dynamics Healthcare industry experience is still most prominent in experience, followed by executives coming from the tech sector: 58% of successful exit-CEOs were at a healthcare organization prior to taking the top job, and 25% hailed from the technology industry.

Multifunctional experience is critical: 70% of CEOs brought demonstrable P&L leadership experience, whether as a president or within another C-suite role.

Snapshot: Healthtech CEOs’ route-to-the-top

In charting their paths to success, we looked at CEOs’ prior CEO experience, P&L leadership experience, and role held immediately prior to reaching the top position.

Source: RRA proprietary research on 60 Healthcare Technology CEOs; companies have achieved $1B in revenue or a successful exit via IPO, M&A, or LBO – initially PE-backed. Exit occurred between 2015 and 2025.

CEO experience is not a prerequisite to a successful exit, but prior P&L leadership experience was common among the leaders in this group. Just under half of first-time CEOs had prior P&L experience as a president, GM, or Divisional CEO. Aside from the CEO and president archetypes, chief operating officer and chief product officer were the next most common step-up roles. Bringing an enterprise and systems thinking view is a critical factor to success.

We also found that successful CEO talent may join a healthtech organization from another industry. The majority of leadership has healthcare (across healthtech and health services) experience, but 25% of CEOs joined their healthtech company from the technology industry, and 20% hailed from professional services, private capital, or other industries. There have been recent appointments outside of healthcare to CEO roles in healthtech, and we often advise clients to think about the holistic composition of the team.

This combination—P&L responsibility and familiarity with disruptive technologies (in the healthcare space or otherwise)—equips future healthtech CEOs with the agility to innovate and execute company objectives.

Hiring and supporting the healthtech CEO of the future

Given these findings, investors and boards seeking their next healthtech CEO should consider the following:

Emphasize skills and experiences over titles: The data shows that prior CEO experience is not a primary indicator of future success as a CEO in healthtech. However, the role of the CEO has become more and more complex. When evaluating CEO candidates, it’s important to look for skills that are fit for purpose of  today’s CEOs: managing complexities, setting strategy and executing for results, bringing a decisive approach, and reputable leadership and influencing abilities. Decisive and galvanizing leadership matters when managing companies amidst healthtech’s complex environment and road ahead.

Don’t underestimate the support a board can provide: Since healthtech CEOs are often first-time CEOs, it’s important to evolve boards in an optimal way to provide appropriate guidance at the business’ key inflection points. Strategic board appointments of tenured healthcare and technology executives will provide invaluable insight and perspective to support a first-time CEO, especially in a dynamic market.

Complement your CEO: When building the executive team, leaders must ensure they hire complementary skillsets and industry expertise. In a healthtech organization, this often means bringing in SaaS and product leadership early on, so the organization is equipped with the innovative thinking needed to scale. Onboarding and integration are critical to bringing in executives to healthcare from outside the industry.

Implications for healthtech leadership teams

Assessing for decisive leadership, sense of urgency, and systems thinking is key to success.

The data on healthtech CEOs’ experiences prior to their CEO role sheds light not only on the archetype of a successful leader, but also on implications for investors, boards, and the broader executive team. Since prior CEO experience is not necessary for outperformance, it’s reasonable to hire CEO talent for potential. Assessing for decisive leadership, sense of urgency, and systems thinking is key to success. Rather than focusing on a checklist of titles and experience, CEOs can show strength through functional and industry experience and leadership traits, especially if existing leadership team members’ skills are complementary. To that end, when building out top teams and board seats, consider the expertise already present within the organization and mapping new leaders to current and future gaps when making decisions about new leadership talent.

Dynamic markets require dynamic leadership teams and formidable CEOs to impart the right strategy and direction for their organizations. Today’s healthtech CEOs and investors can look to the roadmap and experience of leaders who drove successful exits in the past to inspire and inform future success.

Methodology

*In this analysis, we defined a successful exit as having achieved $1 billion in revenue or having led a private equity-backed company through an exit—be it an IPO, acquisition, or LBO.

Authors

Noël Auguston leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare Technology practice. She is based in Boston.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices