Walking the Stakeholder Tightrope: The Key to Effective Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Walking the Stakeholder Tightrope: The Key to Effective Leadership

Are your leaders able to influence a diverse group of stakeholders? Here’s how socially intelligent leaders can navigate complex relationships.

Connect with our experts

Social intelligence definition     Benefits of social intelligence     How to become more socially intelligent

As executives climb the leadership ranks, they interact with an ever-more diverse group of stakeholders, from employees to customers, investors, shareholders, and regulators. Each group brings unique needs—and expectations. Leaders who can actively engage their stakeholders and navigate their differing perspectives will steer their organizations forward. Those that don’t, risk becoming entangled in a web of competing expectations. This is where social intelligence comes in.

To succeed today, leaders need to be able to navigate complex interpersonal dynamics. They need to figure out what makes their stakeholders tick: What truly matters to them? What do they expect from you as their leader? And how can you effectively work together to achieve mutual goals?

These answers are often not immediately obvious. It’s up to the leader to actively listen, read a room, and flex their communication style and tone based on who they are speaking with. This is something that only socially intelligent leaders can do. This isn’t a nice-to-have soft skill, but a strategic necessity that can make or break an executive’s  effectiveness and success.

What does social intelligence mean in the leadership context?

Engages proactively and skillfully in social interactions.

Maintains control of emotions and feelings.

Ready to listen and help, when needed.

Demonstrates sympathy and empathy for others.

Enjoys the company of others and building relationships.

Sensitive to and insightful of the perceptions of others.

Being a socially intelligent leader is in part about being a good storyteller. It’s about understanding your audience, tuning in to what matters to them, and presenting your ideas in a way that resonates, unites, and motivates.  It’s also about listening closely, asking the right questions, and demonstrating that you’re paying attention, you’re curious about their world, and you see the critical part they’ll play in the road ahead.

Dana Landis
Leadership advisor, Russell Reynolds Associates

Why is social intelligence such an important leadership skill?

Socially intelligent leaders pick up on subtle cues. They can quickly determine whether a particular conversation is landing well, and importantly, they know when to step back, take stock, and pivot if required. They are able to flex their approach between sharing personal anecdotes to rally the team, while also knowing when to not overshare.

Social intelligence is not about pleasing everyone. Senior leaders—and especially CEOs—haven’t been placed in the role to make friends. They have to be willing to make tough decisions, to be bold, and be unafraid of the consequences. But through their likeability and interpersonal acumen, they are able to turn potential conflicts into opportunities for collaborative problem solving.

When leaders are socially intelligent, they typically unlock the following benefits.

01

More likely to create a culture of innovation.

Socially intelligent leaders are able to create an environment that’s psychologically safe. In these organizations, teams feel comfortable thinking outside of the box. They know that no question is off-limits, they can take risks, and they have the freedom to throw things at the wall and see what sticks. Promoting the mindset that you can’t fail gives people the space to grow and learn, and breeds innovation.

02

Builds stronger relationships.

Socially intelligent leaders will see a diverse group of stakeholders and know what their preferences are, and what communication style works for each of them. These leaders are thoughtful in their approach. They look out for and effectively read subtle cues, they’re always listening, and they have the ability to show compassion when it matters most. This unlocks stronger relationships, more cohesive teams, and better collaboration.

03

Better able to build trust.

Trust is incredibly hard to build and yet can be lost in an instant. Socially intelligent leaders understand the value of trust and treat every interaction with their teams as an opportunity to build it. Ultimately, trust comes down to backing up words with tangible actions. Socially intelligent leaders aren’t devoid of making mistakes. But when they do, they respond with honesty, integrity, and authenticity, which allows them to maintain trusted relationships.

04

Minimize leadership turnover.

Socially astute leaders are able to pick up on social cues, such as a mood shift in their team or lower engagement levels. Rather than pushing forward and continuing on the path they’re on, they will lean in and actively listen to their team. When a leader understands their team, and knows their values and motives, they can take action to address the problem and minimize leadership turnover.

We often think of social intelligence as a set of "people skills," but it's far more profound than that. Socially intelligent leaders are able to navigate complexity and uncertainty with remarkable precision, often steering their organizations towards success in ways that, to others, might seem like simple intuition or luck.

Erin Zolna
Leadership advisor, Russell Reynolds Associates

How can leaders become more socially intelligent?

Being socially intelligent will come more naturally to some than to others. But, executives always have the chance to refine some or all of their leadership style and the way they communicate with their team. It can be ramped up by having a higher level of self-awareness of their social derailers. Or by investing in an executive coach to help them recognize times when they could be more socially astute.

Start with self. The best leaders are voracious consumers of data and are constantly finding ways to create space in their schedules to stay curious outside the 'day-to-day' of their roles. They convert their self-awareness into 'self-knowledge'—the ability to adjust their behaviors and their rituals to take into account when they are in positive or negative situations. They know what triggers their stress and energy depletion and have mechanisms for recovery (both physical and mental) that they apply consistently.

Strong networks. Leaders need broad and rich networks—inside and outside of their organizations, and at multiple levels. The best leaders are very connected, hearing 360-degree inputs from employees levels down, their peers, and a wide range of external sources. These insights are not only critical to ongoing self-awareness and development—they also help leaders to filter each new instinct through a trusted set of colleagues and team members who will challenge and even redirect to get the optimal outcome.

Intentional inclusion. Great leaders assertively pull perspectives from everywhere into their decision-making processes. No matter how expansive or fast thinking a leader may be, their pattern recognition will be improved if they actively get other brains on the challenge and resist the temptation to go it alone. Every leader needs a 'kitchen cabinet' to help them hear the truth and make the right decisions. Nothing is truer than the adage that senior leaders don't hear the unvarnished truth enough—so great leaders seek it out.

The power of stories. As leaders own their development journeys and prioritize moments of reflection, stories can be an especially effective way of demonstrating authenticity and vulnerability. Some leaders are natural storytellers, but they need to make sure their stories don’t sound too slick or superficial. Other leaders struggle with opening up and sharing—requiring structure, practice, and feedback to hone a few stories that can make an impact.

Authors

Dana Landis

San Francisco

David Lange

Chicago

Shannon Knott

Atlanta

Erin Zolna

New York

Leadership Portrait

How can organizations understand and unlock senior executive potential?

Explore other critical Leadership Skills

Article

Featured
8 min read

Think Leaders Need All the Answers? Think Again

Assessment and Benchmarking

Article

Featured
8 min read

Fight or Flight: The Leaders Who Emerge Stronger From Setbacks

Assessment and Benchmarking

Article

Featured
8 min read

Overcome Decision Paralysis: Finding Order in Chaos

Assessment and Benchmarking

View All

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Ready to start your FUTURE-READY LEADERSHIP journey?

Speak to a consultant

The Future of Leadership

The world is changing. Here’s how leadership needs to change with it

Learn more

How can organizations identify leaders who are both adept at predicting and preparing for change and keeping their organization steady?

Discover how

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices