The Path to Gender Parity in Danish Finance Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Path to Gender Parity in Danish Finance Leadership

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsInclusionCulture RiskSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

Mads Wilhelmsen

December 03, 2024

7 min

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsInclusionCulture RiskSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Inclusive leadership boosts resilience and innovation. Yet, only 10% of CFOs and 20% of CFO-1 in Denmark are women. Systemic change is key.

Close

Mads Wilhelmsen

Copenhagen

High-performing organizations recognize that inclusive leadership is about more than just compliance; diverse leadership teams are also more resilient, innovative, and experience better financial performance. Clear, strategic, and sustainable actions needed to realize the benefits.

In fact, Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor found that only 44% of next-generation finance leaders believe their company is prepared to address DE&I issues and only 38% agree that their company has a culture that retains their top talent.

To better understand the barriers women leaders in finance talent face, we spoke with ten current and former Danish CFOs, conducted a comprehensive analysis of inclusive leadership at the CFO-1 level across 20 companies (including the OMX-25 and other large-cap Danish organizations), and leveraged our suite of research on women leaders’ motivators and perceptions.

Denmark is historically considered a global front-runner of gender equality. However, when it comes to finance leadership, our analysis reveals a different story:

10%

of group CFOs across the 20 studied companies are women

20%

of CFO direct reports (CFO-1) in these organizations are  women

Despite finance functions typically achieving gender parity in entry and specialist levels, the data makes it clear that women’s representation dwindles as they rise through the organization. And while this trend certainly isn’t unique to finance, it has significant impact beyond finance leadership outcomes. As the CFO role is one of the most common “CEO feeder” roles, achieving gender parity in this function is crucial not only for more equitable finance leadership, but also for overall efforts to improve women’s representation at the very top of the house.

So, how can finance leaders ensure they are creating inclusive environment at every level that fosters the growth and development of all their people?

I see so many talented women in finance but rarely do all those women make it to the director and VP level. This is not due to their capabilities but rather other external factors.”

Danish CFO

Why women’s representation drops as they rise through the finance ranks

Both RRA data and our CFO interviewees’ testimonials show that inclusion and culture decreases significantly at higher levels within the finance function. While some organizations may have a balanced or even favorable gender distribution at lower levels, the representation of women tends to diminish as you move up the hierarchy, particularly at the director level and above.

The reasons for this include, but are not limited to; work-life balance, imposter syndrome, lack of career development and allocation of resources (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Challenges women finance talent face in Denmark

Competing Priorities

Work-life balance is a significant challenge for women in finance as they advance within an organization, similar to other non-finance roles. Women tend to index on collective factors that are dependent on many people to achieve—company culture, long-term organizational stability, and an encouraging environment.

Non-Linear Career Advancement

Women finance talent are often keen to invest in their career development, seeking more responsibility quickly. Companies unable to meet these expectations risk losing them to smaller firms offering faster progression and broader roles. Women make this move since they feel limited in a large company but in turn this creates difficulties when trying to return to large corporations due to scale and complexity.

Imposter Phenomenon

Women finance professionals often find it challenging to advance into senior roles, with imposter phenomenon being a significant contributing factor. Despite their qualifications and achievements, many women in finance might lack role models who can inspire them and make them feel comfortable in seeking the next level.

Limited Resourcing

With the increased focus on cost optimization (versus growth agendas) over the past decade, many finance functions in Denmark have been hesitant to grow and develop their finance teams. This lack of investment has an outsized impact on women and other underrepresented talent. This is because 1) investment into the leadership and culture within the finance function and 2) when organizations don’t grow their teams, those who are underrepresented have inherently less opportunities to move up.

How to break finance’s glass ceiling and elevate more women to the top

When it comes to recruiting at the VP level and above, we aim to have 75% women candidates in the final pool to ensure diverse succession planning and pipeline development.”

Danish CFO

Getting more women into CFO roles is not about blunt, short-term fixes—it depends on commitments to systemic, organizational change.

Leaders in finance and beyond need to ask themselves: Am I taking actionable and targeted steps to address the decreased levels of inclusive leadership at the top of the finance function?

To leverage these learnings, we recommend that Danish organizations shift the paradigm around hiring and retaining top women finance leaders through the following strategies:

Take personal accountability: CFOs should not only champion inclusive leadership initiatives, but also hold themselves accountable for measurable outcomes. By actively promoting a culture that prioritizes equity and transparency—as well as the psychological safety to speak up when these values aren’t upheld—finance leaders can empower their teams to drive sustained change.

Accountability starts with embedding inclusive leadership targets as a strategic priority and objectives into the role descriptions of all its finance leaders.

Transparently share the composition of the workforce through the release of annual reports, aligned to the goals and objectives set to diversify all levels of talent.

Define a clear path to success: Ensure that the formal written rules of the workplace—including policies, processes, and practices—support equitable talent outcomes.

Revisit your CFO success profile to ensure inclusivity.

Create clear job paths for every role/function with multiple entry points and progression routes, and make these paths visible to all employees as part of their onboarding and development conversations.

Evolve family leave policies to include paternity leave, recognizing that fathers also want to take time off to care for their new family member and that childcare is not only the women’s responsibility.

Ensure equity by providing access to flexible working arrangements for all employees.

Augment succession plans: There needs to be a strong emphasis on equitable succession practices to ensure that women are considered and prepared for leadership roles.

Inclusive leadership talent pipelines by mitigating blind spots, reduce groupthink and become future ready by scoping out your talent needs and sourcing dynamic, socially, and stylistically diverse, and skilled talent that reflects the ecosystem of the organization.

Education and training for sponsors can help them connect deeply with those who don’t share their background by showing them how to practice courage, vulnerability, and curiosity. And the benefits of inclusive sponsorship go beyond underrepresented leaders; sponsors also gain personally and professionally by showing their commitment to investing in their organization’s future leaders.

Enable your hiring teams to have a clear sense of the gaps and missing identities and perspectives sought from candidates by setting diversity goals against the gaps of the current make-up of the internal team and how well it reflects the ecosystem of the larger organization.

Mentorship & Coaching: According to RRA’s H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, 71% of next-generation finance talent stated that having formal mentorship had a major or large impact on their professional development and achieving their career goals.

Several companies have implemented mentoring programs, leadership education, and succession planning with a focus on inclusive leadership. The importance of role models within the organization is a key factor in encouraging women to aim for leadership positions.

Leaders can activate and prioritize the design, development, and offering of structured sponsorship programs that target unrepresented groups.

Sometimes, internal mentorship and advocacy is not enough to expose next-generation leaders to the range of experience required to progress to the next level. When this happens, consider investing in external development programs for all leaders, including women. This allows them to network with their peers, gain new understanding that benefits both them and the business, and shows top performers that their organization is willing to invest in them for the long haul.

For more recommendations on closing the leadership gender gap, please visit:

Why is Everybody Leaving? 8 Equitable Steps to Retain Your Diverse Talent

What’s Motivating Your Women Leaders?

Why Aren’t There More Women CEOs? What You Might Not Know About Your Women Leaders

Methodology

Russell Reynolds Associates (RRA) completed a quantitative analysis using Boardex, LinkedIn and RRA proprietary knowledge of the CFO-1 level in 20 companies (OMX C25 + other large-cap), and conducted ten interviews with CFOs to gather further qualitative insights.

When identifying key themes across the interviews, we held a threshold of approximately one-third of the interviewees discussing or mentioning a similar topic or issue before considered it to be a recurring theme. This threshold ensures that the theme is not an outlier or a single person's perspective but rather a concern or observation shared by multiple CFOs.

Defining inclusive leadership: RRA recognizes that inclusive leadership is all-inclusive and not limited only to race. We believe that the definition of inclusive leadership— especially in the professional realm—refers to a society that embraces differences in race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, age, ability, and even professional—and personal—background. However, in this study, RRA focused solely on gender to try and understand why women are underrepresented within the finance function in Denmark.

Authors

Thomas Bo Krogslund Joergensen is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Copenhagen.
Mohammed Khan is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Simone Thelin is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers research team. She is based in Copenhagen.
Mads Wilhelmsen is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Copenhagen.

Acknowledgments

The insights would not be possible without our esteemed participants' generous time and input.

Christian Baltzer - CFO, Falck

Anders Boyer - CFO, Pandora

Karina Deacon - Former CFO, DFDS

Philip Eickhoff - CFO, Leo Pharma

Line Fandrup - CFO, NKT

Søren Jelert – CFO, GN Group

Lise Mortensen - Former CFO, Chr.Hansen

Torben Nyholm - CFO, Arla

Anders Lonning Skovgaard - CFO, Coloplast

Hans Martin Smith - CFO, Vestas

References

1 Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor
2 Russell Reynolds Associates’ Inclusion and Culture Unlock Business Advantage
3 RRA proprietary analysis of A.P. Møller - Mærsk A, Ambu, Arla, Coloplast B, Danske Bank, DFDS, DSV, Falck, FLSmidth, GN Store Nord, ISS, Netcompany, NKT A/S, Nordea Bank ABP, Novo Nordisk B, Ørsted, Pandora, Royal Unibrew, Tryg, and Vestas Wind Systems – July 2024 (Note: some data may be unavailable)

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices