The Rise of the First-Time General Counsel | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Rise of the First-Time General Counsel

Career AdviceSuccessionLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive Search

Article

July 28, 2025

10 min

Career AdviceSuccessionLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Companies are appointing more first-time general counsel than ever – here’s how organizations and step-up appointments can succeed.

Close

Casey Gordon

Chicago

Ann Hiat

Washington DC

A significant shift in the general counsel ranks is underway. In 2024, for the first time, the majority (54%) of Fortune 500 general counsel appointments were internal successors rather than external hires. Every one of those internal successors was stepping into the role for the first time; another 6% were external hires who were also first time general counsel.

This trend reflects a growing confidence in leadership potential over prior title, as well as a desire for fresh thinking, cultural continuity, and closer alignment with evolving business needs.

To better understand how companies identify and gain confidence in first-time general counsel candidates, and how those candidates successfully transition into the role, Russell Reynolds interviewed over 20 executives, including hiring decision-makers and first-time GCs themselves.

Here’s the advice they shared for the next generation of general counsel and the organizations appointing them.

Why companies choose a first-timer over an experienced general counsel

A known quantity (when internally appointed)

Many of the first-time general counsel we interviewed stepped into the top job during periods of disruption, uncertainty or broader transformation. Their deep institutional knowledge, understanding of the high stakes challenges, and trusted relationships with the C-suite and board enabled a smoother transition than might be expected with an external hire. Unlike external hires, they could immediately begin addressing business issues without needing time to learn the culture, personalities, or dynamics of the organization. One hiring manager shared that, in the hiring process, they ultimately coalesced around an internal candidate who developed a strong rapport with the CEO by really understanding their strategic vision and discussing what general counsel qualities would best support that vision.

Another hiring manager shared an anecdote where they needed to hire a general counsel because their incumbent unexpectedly resigned after a CEO change. “We couldn’t afford the risk of appointing an outsider, so we looked at who we had internally,” he explained. “We had one high potential candidate who we knew was one rotation away from ready, and we chose her. She came out of one of our businesses and had really strong business law experiences.”

Another explained that in addition to a relatively new CEO, there were recent transitions in the CFO and COO seats as well, so continuity was particularly important in the general counsel role.

A fresh perspective and the energy

Appointing a first-time general counsel can bring fresh energy and a willingness to challenge long-standing practices. Several hiring managers shared that an appetite for transformation was a key driver in choosing a first-timer. “Our former general counsel had been in seat for upwards of 15 years, so their retirement was a perfect opportunity to look at things differently. Also, although a first-time general counsel, our successor knows what best-in-class looks like from their previous experiences at companies that are even larger than ours.”

Similarly, many first-time general counsel told us that their fresh approach to leadership, ability to collaborate, and willingness to leverage technology were key reasons for their appointments. “I needed to make our ways of working smarter, with a new approach to technology and relationships with the wider company,” one first-time general counsel shared with us. “The CEO was looking for a partner who could be more engaged earlier in the business process, which is quite a big change for us.”

Notably, what many first-time general counsel appointments lacked in traditional experience, they made up for in drive. “We looked at sitting general counsels and couldn’t find anyone as motivated or eager as our internal candidate was,” said one hiring executive. For companies looking to energize or evolve their legal function, appointing a first-time general counsel can be a bold and effective move.

Appointing and developing first-time GCs with confidence

Learning the C-suite and board dynamics

The success of any general counsel hinges, in large part, on building and maintaining trusted relationships with the board and other members of the C-suite. We heard from first time general counsel who were able to become more proactive partners to their board and C-suite by quickly identifying recurring themes that came up. As one first time general counsel shared, “By understanding those patterns, I was able to streamline my interactions with the board and free up time to focus on strategic priorities, rather than repeatedly addressing the same issues.” Per many hiring managers with whom we spoke, “the fit with the CEO is critical.”

Adjust the scope of the role when needed

Some organizations modified the general counsel remit to fit the strengths and development areas of the new appointee. With the general counsel remit often encompassing compliance, government affairs, risk, and more, a first-timer may need additional support in certain pillars of the role where they have not previously had exposure.

Some organizations opted to spin out certain components of the remit to standalone departments, while others deliberately beefed up the talent profile of direct reports in key areas to take the pressure off the new general counsel. “We hired a more experienced chief compliance officer than we normally would, just to give the general counsel more support,” one executive noted.

In several cases, this decision was informed by earlier assessment and benchmarking, which helped clarify the candidate’s readiness and areas for targeted support. A few organizations took it further by building custom onboarding plans that culminated in comprehensive introductions and board exposure meetings, business immersion, or listening tours. These moves not only right-sized the role, but also accelerated the general counsel’s confidence and credibility.

Build the right support system

In addition to bringing in senior talent to strengthen aspects of the function, some organizations facilitated internal mentorship, formal onboarding for board interactions, or buddy systems to create a safe space for questions, progression, and reflection that propelled the function forward.

One hiring leader we interviewed explained that they budgeted a slightly more expensive proxy preparation process for their new general counsel’s first year, expecting that she might need to (and they would want her to) lean more on outside counsel for the first run, given her background was not as a securities lawyer.

Benchmark the market and assess with intent

Even when promoting internally, benchmarking against external talent builds confidence and objectivity. It ensures the selected leader is the best choice for the organization at that moment, and helps uncover strengths or development areas that may otherwise be overlooked. One hiring manager shared that reviewing the backgrounds of comparable candidates in market gave them the necessary reassurance to appoint their first-time GC from within.

Benchmarking can also uncover non-obvious, yet high-impact candidates; individuals without prior general counsel titles but with standout track records in key areas. “I had experience of big ticket litigation and crisis management, which were crucial reasons I was appointed,” one first-time appointee told us.

Bringing thorough assessment into the external search process gives the organization the chance to get really comfortable with the hire, creating a specific development plan to ensure the new general counsel is set up for success.

“Assessment is such a good investment,” said one hiring executive. “When you’re hiring a step-up, you have to focus on what’s critical and non-negotiable, and assess for potential and learning agility."

Strategies for aspiring general counsels

Own your development

The scope of the general counsel role continues to expand. As these leaders increasingly become the binding tissue of an organization, it’s important for aspiring general counsel to develop a breadth of experience across legal, business, and strategy. Legal leaders looking to step into the top role should not be afraid to raise their hands and have explicit conversations with their managers, as well as other key stakeholders across the organization, about how they get exposure to a breadth of functions which will set them up for a general counsel role down the road.

“Part of why I got this role is because I previously had the chance to set up and run a P&L,” reported one first-time general counsel. “It was a chance to demonstrate my value. Through running a P&L, I have a true appreciation of the issues the CEO faces.” Another new general counsel intentionally stepped into a corporate strategy role to demonstrate business instincts. That move later positioned them as the natural successor.

Take on high-stakes, enterprise-level work

“I handled big, thorny, complex litigations that were very public, and I handled them well,” said one first-time general counsel, explaining why she felt ready to take the top job. Owning challenging, high-risk matters is one of the most effective ways to build credibility and readiness for a general counsel role.

Engaging in visible, cross-functional issues gives rising legal leaders exposure to broader business challenges, tests their ability to navigate ambiguity, and offers a chance to earn trust from executive leadership and the board. Indeed, one hiring manager remarked that a key to good mentorship and succession planning involves giving the second-in-command the ability to “run with the hardest things that have high visibility.” For many, it is this kind of make-or-break work that demonstrates they’re ready to lead the function.

Gain exposure to the board and C-suite as early as you can

Several first-time general counsels had previous exposure to the board, often through corporate secretary roles, government relations roles, or through holding key governance responsibilities. A number of them shared that they had to be proactive about relationship-building. “I asked for time with board members. I knew I needed it more than they did,” one said. Another reflected, “I was too cautious. I could have been more direct about setting up regular touchpoints.”

Work to understand the business while embracing the unknown

First-time general counsel consistently emphasized the importance of getting up to speed quickly on the company’s financials, strategy, and broader competitive market. This was a novel challenge for some who have not sat in the top chair before. This foundational understanding not only helps align the legal function with business goals but also builds credibility in enterprise-level conversations.

At the same time, many reflected on the shift from structured legal roles to the more ambiguous, advisory nature of the general counsel position. “I came from a risk background, where things are much more structured,” one said. “As general counsel, you have to step into unfamiliar areas, make sense of them quickly, and still give guidance.”

One hiring stakeholder observed part of the reason they were comfortable making the internal appointment was that that person “demonstrated she was really dialed into the financials of the company,” and was “highly attuned to the business.” They had previously spent time reflect on their growth areas and long-term potential, which helped the team align on her readiness even though she hadn’t done the full scope of the role before. It highlights the importance of understanding an executives ability to adapt, flex, and grow with the business.

Lead confidently, but don’t go it alone

First-time general counsels often find themselves managing complex team dynamics. They may inherit team members with more experience than them, or step into a role others internally had hoped to get. Many intentionally leaned into what can be a delicate dynamic, and were thoughtful about taking the opportunity to reshape roles to maximize individual team member’s strengths.

The hiring managers spoke to this dynamic as well, and especially the importance of being both a vulnerable and galvanizing leader. “Our first-time general counsel did a great job of bringing the direct reports into the fold. She is physically in the office with them and has been able to connect her new strategic direction back to the team’s ideas. She gets them to own decisions and ensures they are the ones giving updates on key change initiatives – which means they feel heard, too.”

Another HR leader shared how their new, first-time general counsel built credibility with the team. “She brought her direct reports into key decisions, gave them ownership, and made sure they were the ones presenting progress. That helped build trust and cohesiveness across the team.”

At the same time, the C-suite can be isolating. There are fewer clear answers and less structured guidance, especially for those navigating complex internal dynamics and unfamiliar terrain. “You expect perfection from yourself, but the job often demands judgement calls in gray areas. That’s where peer networks are invaluable,” one general counsel said. Others highlighted the importance of building a trusted group of external advisors early, particularly when transitioning industries. “I joined World 50. It’s been a huge help. My advice is to build and invest in a peer network early on in your journey.”

Success as a first-time general counsel does not end with the appointment into the top job. In many ways, it begins there. The difference between stepping into the role and thriving in it often comes down to how deliberately the organization invests in the leader’s early environment, relationships, and runway; the same goes for the individual stepping into the role. With the right scaffolding in place, first-time general counsel can not only rise to the challenge; they can often reshape the legal function for the better. For organizations willing to bet on potential, the payoff is a trusted, strategic advisor equipped to lead with energy, credibility, influence, and impact.

Authors

Casey Gordon co-leads leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Legal, Regulatory & Compliance capability in the Americas. She is based in Chicago.
Ann Hiat is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Legal, Regulatory & Compliance capability in the Americas. She is based in Washington D.C..
Alison Huntington leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers and Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers Knowledge teams. She is based in London.
Jason Kipkala is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers and Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers Knowledge team. He is based in Toronto.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices