Session 1: CEOs Share Why It Takes a Village to Adopt and Deploy AI | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Session 1: CEOs Share Why It Takes a Village to Adopt and Deploy AI

RRA AI CEO Lab

We brought together CEOs from a range of geographies and industries, including consumer products, IT software and services, and financial services, to hear how they were actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology. Here is what we learned.

Three key takeaways from our conversation with 100 CEOs who are actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology.

Adopting a learning mindset will incentivize and accelerate innovation

It takes a village—the CEO needs to empower the C-suite to work together on AI

The board has a critical role to play, but director understanding is mixed

Without the functions working in a network manner, there can be no meaningful transformation. The role of the CEO is to facilitate those connections. It takes team building, trust, and connectivity to ensure C-suite leaders move away from self-promotion to team promotion. The mission needs to be more rewarding than personal success.”

CEO attendee
RRA AI CEO Labs

How CEOs are adopting AI

01. To create business value. One CEO describes AI as a “game-changer” for their business. They said the AI tools they have adopted, including Gen-AI, predictive analytics, natural language processing, and robotic process automation, are creating value through new revenue streams and increased pricing.

02. To provide better customer service. CEOs are harnessing AI’s predictive powers to provide a better experience for customers. This includes using AI tools to analyze customer information and signpost them to relevant products or services. Some are using AI chatbots for customer support, while others are using AI to optimize pricing to drive sales.

03. To optimize business processes. CEOs are adopting AI to boost productivity and efficiency across their businesses and supply chains. Some use AI for inventory management, others for workforce management, or to improve service effectiveness for customers.

04. Sustainability. Attendees are also using AI to support sustainability goals, from tracking KPIs, to digitizing supply chains and sourcing reusable materials. These AI-driven business models emphasize circularity, sustainability, and advanced customer personalization.

Key lessons from CEOs actively adopting AI

Our attendees shared the opportunities, challenges, and lessons they had faced when implementing AI across their organizations.

Lesson 1: Adopt a learning mindset to accelerate AI innovation

The group discussed how CEOs need to personally invest time learning about AI if they are to differentiate hype from reality. There was agreement that AI creates a brave new world for CEOs, requiring them to step up and more deeply engage with both internal technology functions as well as clients and customers on complex tech-driven solutions and products. Key issues included prioritizing initiatives amidst abundant opportunities, necessitating a focus on capital allocation, and adopting rapid deployment while embedding responsible AI practices.

One CEO said, “The AI wave and Gen-AI wave are much more complicated for leaders to comprehend than any other tech cycle in the past 30 years. With this in mind, we need to be part of the discovery—seeing what works and what doesn’t, and what to continue investing in, as well as paying attention to the experiences of teams inside the company.” They advised treating innovation like a startup. “You need to understand how to think differently—and carry thousands of people on the learning journey,” they said.

One CEO who helms an organization where AI touches 50% of revenues shared how adopting a Center of Excellence dedicated to AI was helping to ensure rapid deployment of the technology across the business. “The amount of creativity and the number of people embracing AI is unbelievably fast,” they said.

Another CEO advocated actively embracing pilots as a way to both experiment and understand which use cases hold the most promise. “My advice would be to try multiple things concurrently; the world is changing too fast to put all your eggs in one basket,” they said. “Not every experiment will work. But we’re trying to learn quickly about use cases to focus on, which technologies we should consider using, and what change management is required to get the biggest bang for our buck. Running these experiments gives us a lot of unvarnished data about what’s going on and allows me to have more confidence going forward.”

Another shared how looking at AI through the value creation lens was a useful way of prioritizing AI experiments. “Instead of applying AI as a scattershot across the business, we’re trying to be very surgical. First, we identified the value creation drivers for our business over the next three to five years. Then we asked: ‘How could we use AI to facilitate that?’”

Lesson 2: It’s up to the CEO to empower the C-suite around AI

The discussion highlighted the importance of the C-suite's role in navigating AI's rapid evolution, as led top-down by an AI-informed CEO. This is not easy. Some CEOs shared how their efforts have been hamstrung by C-suite leaders who continued to advocate for their functions or business units, rather than adopting the enterprise mindset necessary to spearhead large-scale transformation. It's critical CEOs solve this challenge.

As one CEO said: “In a time of radical transformation and invention of different business and operational models, you need your C-suite working cross-functionally. Without the functions working in a network manner, there can be no meaningful transformation. The role of the CEO is to facilitate those connections. It takes team building, trust, and connectivity to ensure C-suite leaders move away from self-promotion to team promotion. The mission needs to be more rewarding than personal success. Collaborations, in the age of transformations like AI, require digital people, operational people, business people, and analytics to come together. That’s how you move forward.”

Another CEO shared how they empowered teams one level below the C-suite in order to get more cross-functional working. “This cannot be an IT-led project. It needs to be a business leader-led project, with people who are able to execute on this,” they shared.

Attendees also discussed that while CEOs and senior leaders need to spearhead transformation, it makes best sense for them to ensure innovation flourishes across the whole organization, rather than over-centralizing AI adoption. As Harpreet Khurana, RRA’s Chief Digital and Data Officer, shared, “It is important to find the equilibrium between centralization of innovation and unfettered, unchecked mass innovation across the organization.” One CEO shared how their organization had worked to address privacy and security considerations, before decentralizing AI experimentation to yield ideas and prioritizing projects to progress. “In a world of Gen-AI and AI, privacy and security will take a lot more attention. We saw that as being very important to sort out first. Then the team was able to scale in a multi-functional way,” they said.

Lesson 3: The board has a critical role to play, but director understanding is mixed

The group agreed that the revolution caused by AI was absolutely a board-level issue, and if it was not represented in the boardroom, AI would not typically get addressed in the organization. Here, it was agreed that the board needs to play a bigger role, helping the organization strike a balance between long-term transformation and short-term performance. Those that can achieve this will reap dividends. One Harvard-led study showed a strong correlation between the technology intensity of an organization and its performance in the stock market—specifically those organizations with the strongest technology architecture and innovation processes outperformed their peers.

CEOs shared how their boards were looking to actively upskill in the area of AI. But this doesn’t always mean bringing in AI experts. Some boards are adding members who are able to think more generally about how they can use technology to transform their business models.

The group also discussed the dynamics of board engagement with AI, noting a range of understanding and enthusiasm among board members. The dialogue revealed a desire for more AI education and strategic guidance from the board, with some CEOs saying their boards had appointed digital and technology experts to navigate AI's complexities and ensure responsible governance. One shared: “Our board is looking for more education. They’re looking for help and defining what their role is in overseeing AI.” Another added: “It’s tricky because many of the board members are learning, and probably know less than the management team in many ways. We have some people who are quite knowledgeable, others who are less so. It’s important the board gets the right level of knowledge and insights to first and foremost be able to govern what we’re doing, and second, to help lead us and push us to do more.”

Back to RRA AI CEO Lab main page

View the next session

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices