Session 2: Why CEOs Need to Carefully Manage AI Resistance | RRA AI CEO Lab | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Session 2: Why CEOs Need to Carefully Manage AI Resistance

RRA AI CEO Lab

We brought together CEOs from a range of geographies and industries, including financial services, media, IT software and services, and biopharmaceuticals, to hear how they were actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology. Here is what we learned.

Three key takeaways from our conversation with CEOs who are actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology.

It’s important for CEOs to fully lean into AI transformation.

CEOs need to work to address knowledge gaps and adopt a learning mindset.

Tech transformations typically fail at the frontline, so managing AI resistance is key.

My entry point to transformation is always culture. Organizational change can be made within five minutes on a piece of paper. Cultural change takes longer and is the most difficult thing to get right, but it’s critical to success.”

CEO attendee
RRA AI CEO Labs

How CEOs are adopting AI

01. To create efficiencies. CEOs shared how they were using AI to execute mundane tasks and drive efficiencies. One said, “Many of our employees do a lot of processing, a lot of typing, and inputting, which we know they don’t like to do. So, figuring out how to use AI on these tasks is the first thing we’re looking at.” RRA’s Chief Digital and Data Analytics Officer, Harpreet Khurana, added, “The more CEOs can take busy work and automate it, the more they can focus on the EQ work.”

02. To future-proof their organizations. CEOs shared how disruption was the biggest risk of AI. “It’s no different from the Internet or Mobile—you can be doing great with today’s technology but if somebody comes along with new technologies you face the risk of disruption,” they said. “If you don’t embrace AI, you’re going with your own risk.”  Another CEO added: “Our CRM is going to be completely redefined in the next five years… so we’re going to get disrupted if we don’t stay on top of the curve.”

Key lessons from CEOs actively adopting AI

Our attendees shared the opportunities, challenges, and lessons they had faced when implementing AI across their organizations.

Lesson 1: AI transformation requires radical, not incremental, change

While some CEOs said they didn’t want to move too fast on AI—because “the organization isn’t ready, neither are leaders, and neither are employees”—others were mindful that there was little time to waste.

One CEO shared how they had moved fast on AI after previous digital investments hadn’t always paid off, advocating the importance of ensuring “there was an appetite to fully lean into AI.” They said: “We didn’t have digital infrastructure or a data pool, so we had to make decisions about how to increase the capability of that function. We also needed to paint a picture to the employees about what was going to happen to the market and why we had to move with it. We find that if we tell people the why and the what, you get much better results. You’ve got to bring everyone along.”

Some CEOs are working with external partners to spur change and accelerate action. One had recently worked with consultants to rethink their governance structures but added that it was hard to find the right partners. “We are inundated with tech sales calls each day,” they said. Another CEO, who aims to use AI to speed up productivity and workflows, added that they had chosen to work with ecosystem partners, explaining, “We are trying to select the AI solutions that will help us best, then embed them in our systems. It’s a total waste of time to level up ourselves instead of working with the best and most relevant partners.”

Lesson 2: CEOs need to work to address knowledge gaps and adopt a learning mindset

Attendees also discussed the specific role CEOs can play in driving transformation—and how there was a need for CEOs to upskill on the AI conversation if they are to drive adoption and implementation across their organizations. They also discussed how pilots and experiments were critical to better understanding the potential of AI. As one CEO shared: “We make the greatest leaps when we run innovation experiments. It’s hard to get tech fluency as a CEO when you have a day job, but it helps greatly if there’s an experiment going on and the organization is learning from that.”

The group also spoke about how CEOs can draw on the knowledge and resources of other teams further down the organization. It was felt important for CEOs to spend significant time with teams three levels down in their organizations to get updates on what’s going on with AI, creating deadlines on critical AI projects, getting their hands dirty, and understanding the issues to drive change in the organization. As one CEO made clear: “You can’t look at AI from a C-suite level altitude. You have to really get into the details, so working three levels down is super critical. You can’t just CEO this thing.”

Lesson 3: Tech transformations typically fail at the front line

The CEOs were clear that cultural change is one of the biggest levers CEOs have to accelerate successful AI adoption and implementation. One said: “My entry point to transformation is always culture. Organizational change can be made within five minutes on a piece of paper. Cultural change takes longer and is the most difficult thing to get right, but it’s critical to success.”

CEOs discussed how, despite the benefits of AI to productivity, efficiency, and creativity, workforce resistance can be high. Success factors included creating a culture where innovation can flourish, and also bringing everyone along on the journey. Employee buy-in is critical, so CEOs must spend time explaining the what, why, and how of AI transformation at their organizations.

View the previous session

Back to RRA AI CEO Lab main page

View the next session

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices