Session 4: How APAC CEOs Are Deploying AI—and Their Top Lessons for Success | RRA AI CEO Lab | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Session 4: How APAC CEOs Are Deploying AI—and Their Top Lessons for Success

RRA AI CEO Lab

We brought together CEOs from Asia Pacific across a range of industries, including financial services, luxury, consumer, and IT software and services, to hear how they were actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology. Here is what we learned.

Three key takeaways from our conversation with CEOs who are actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology.

Imagination and learning velocity are key differentiators in AI adoption.

Culture and poor data are the biggest blockers to AI transformation.

AI is a board-level issue, and many are bringing in tech-savvy members.

Whoever learns [AI] fastest wins.”

CEO attendee
RRA AI CEO Labs

How CEOs are adopting AI

01. For transformation: CEOs share how AI will usher in vast changes for organizations, and whole business models will need to be re-imagined. CEOs did mention, however, that an organization needs to have gone through digital transformation and have a connected data house to reap the benefits of AI. It was advised that leaders adopt centralized data stores that are accessible across the organization. But many companies are yet to consolidate their data or leverage the cloud sufficiently to make this happen.

02. To boost productivity and innovation: All attendees were focused on how AI could execute mundane or routine tasks, including admin tasks, customer service, or software development. One CEO shared that, thanks to GenAI, the productivity of their coding team was four times what it previously was, adding that they use GenAI to help write code, as well as check it, optimize it, and trial the result. Optimizing supply chains, investment theses, and strengthening connections with customers were all mentioned as specific use cases.

03. To stay ahead of the competition: Attendees also referenced the risk of being radically disrupted, outperformed, or falling behind the competition, noting that the opportunity available to them through AI was also available to their competitors. One CEO spoke of the most competitive companies being those that learn the fastest. “Whoever learns [AI] fastest wins,” they said.

Key lessons from CEOs actively adopting AI

Our attendees shared the opportunities, challenges, and lessons they had faced when implementing AI across their organizations.

Lesson 1: Imagination and learning velocity are key differentiators

There was agreement among participants that the CEO should be the chief transformer of organizations. As one CEO stated, “If you are serious about transformation and you're not taking it on as your full-time job, nobody will do it.”

One  attendee spoke about the importance of imagination and understanding the art of the possible with AI. “If you look at your internal business processes, a corporation is nothing more than an aggregate of processes: you take inputs, you do something to them, and you produce an output. Well, if  you think about it that way, you can use AI to do a lot of business processes. The question becomes: Can you imagine the use case? One of the impediments to deploying AI is [a lack of] imagination, because you have to rethink your business processes through the lens of what the technology is capable of.”

Attendees also discussed the importance of “learning velocity”—how quickly CEOs can imagine possibilities, experiment, learn, and iterate. One CEO said CEOs need to play the role of both Chief Technology Officer and Chief Learning Officer, before adding: “Everything should be an experiment. Why run two [pilots]? Why not run five or 10? You don’t need to run one every minute, but the idea is that you’re getting data. You farm hypotheses, test those hypotheses, and get an empirical result. You’ve got to do that at scale. You’ve got to do it at speed. But you can’t go faster than you’re capable of learning. So learning is really the critical path on everything.”

Lesson 2: Data and culture are the biggest blockers to transformation

Attendees also discussed the specific role CEOs can play in driving transformation, with three clear themes emerging.

First, ensuring that systems are in place to mine and interpret data—and that you have the right foundational capabilities across the enterprise to harness it. As one CEO said, “Organizations have blocks of data everywhere and you’ve often got duplication of data. We need to solve for that collectively first. It’s going to be incredibly difficult but it’s the journey that we need to get to.”

Another CEO shared, “The age of digital transformation really comes down to data and how you exploit data. I describe data as the lifeblood of the modern enterprise that carries  information and nutrients to all functions. If we get the data right, and we have a system in place where we can learn from that data through a variety of mechanisms, everything  works out well. Then it's just velocity after that.” They added, however, that people are still part of the equation. “We need to be asking, ‘Do we have people who can collaborate with algorithms? Do we have people who can ask the right questions, interpret the results, and then ask the obvious next question and drive that dialogue forward iteratively?’”

The CEO added that diversity of thought is even more critical when building teams in an AI world. “It’s important to find people who are not wed to a particular process or particular way of doing things… My team is very diverse. I have historians, I have scientists, I have economists, I have math people. And conversations can go all over the place, but they tend to be interesting.”

The conversation then touched on the transformation of leadership roles and the importance of CEOs building trust and connectivity within the executive team to facilitate meaningful change. Attendees discussed how leaders needed to pay constant attention to their teams’ experiences as they interact with AI in their roles and accept that although AI may help increase productivity, employees’ cognitive load won’t necessarily decrease.

There was a shared consensus that all employees needed the tools and skills to utilize AI—for innovation to flourish and to create versatility in the workforce. Targeted education and training initiatives will help ensure the workforce becomes agile, informed, and capable of navigating the complexities of AI-driven business landscapes.

Lesson 3: AI is a board-level issue—and many are bringing in tech-savvy members

The group agreed that the revolution caused by AI was absolutely a board-level issue, and if it was not represented in the boardroom, AI would not typically get addressed in the organization. Several attendees mentioned aims to bring in more tech-savvy board members when succession planning was needed in an attempt to modernize the expertise the board could bring. The group discussed that no single figure should be loaded with the entire tech and disruption conversation, though boards must regularly focus dually on both the broader business implications and relevant technological aspects.

View the previous session

Back to RRA AI CEO Lab main page

View the next session

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices