Swiss Executive Committee Landscape: Higher Turnover Amid Global Volatility | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Swiss Executive Committee Landscape: Higher Turnover Amid Global Volatility

Board and CEO Advisory

Article

April 25, 2025

7 min

Board and CEO Advisory

Executive Summary

Key insights from the 2025 edition of Russell Reynolds’ annual comprehensive study of Swiss SMI and SMIM companies’ executive committees.

Close

Jasmine Jenny

Zurich

Alexandra Ettlin

Zurich

Every year, Russell Reynolds Associates analyses the composition of management boards in SMI and SMIM. Our 2025 analysis reveals some interesting trends:

High turnover at the helm: Reflecting the volatile business landscape, we observed higher than average turnovers amongst CEO and executive committees (ECs) for the second year in a row. Half of SMI and 32% of SMIM companies appointed new CEOs in the last two years.

Overall gender diversity improves, but gaps remain in key CEO feeder roles: While there has been gradual improvement in gender diversity in ECs across SMI (25.6%) and SMIM companies (23.4%), only 27% of women EC members have P&L roles, compared to 67% of men.

Notable tenure differences between leadership populations: On average, women spend significantly less time in their EC roles than men. Foreign nationals also depart faster than Swiss citizens—for example, American leaders serve less than four years, while Swiss nationals stay in seat for seven years, on average.

Sustainability remains a key business priority: 95% of SMI companies link their managers' remuneration to ESG targets.

High turnover at the helm

As businesses reset their leadership to thrive in a period of historical change and volatility, above average CEO turnover in Swiss companies continued through 2024, as 50% of SMI and 32% of SMIM companies changed their CEOs in the last two years. This increased turnover aligns with global trends, as noted in RRA’s CEO Turnover Index.

High CEO turnover naturally precipitates changes across ECs, as new CEOs typically seek to reset the top team to align with their vision and current company needs. In total, ten companies experienced a turnover of three or more members in their ECs.

With 75% of new SMI CEOs and 61% of SMIM CEOs coming from within the organization, it’s clear that succession planning efforts are beginning to pay off for Swiss organizations (Figure 1). This reiterates the importance of executive development and thoughtful planning of career opportunities. The most common route-to-the-top for CEOs in SMI companies remains through heading a division or region of their own organization (55%).

Figure 1: SMI & SMIM CEOs’ previous role

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information.

CFO turnover also remained above average in 2024. Unlike CEOs, CFOs are often brought in from other companies, as 58% of SMI and 74% of SMIM CFOs were external appointments.

While overall executive committees’ gender diversity improved, gaps remain in key CEO feeder roles

The SMI shows a moderate increase in the share of women, reaching 25.6%, while SMIM increased to 23.4% (Figure 2). This reflects a narrowing gap between the two indices.

Figure 2: Proportion of women executive committee members by index (2020-2024)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information.

Internationally, SMIM is catching up with SMI, as both indices are now mid-table in women EC member representation, trailing behind leaders such as the UK, Norway, and Sweden (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Average share of women on Executive Committees of major European stock indices in Q4 of the respective year

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025 for Switzerland and Germany; Other countries: European Institute for Gender Equality (eige.europa.eu) | Germany: In 2021, the number of constituents in the DAX was increased from 30 to 40, while the number of constituents in the MDAX was reduced from 60 to 50.

Despite improvements, some companies still lack women executives—two SMI and six SMIM companies have no women in leadership. Also noteworthy: women in SMI and SMIM ECs typically head corporate functions. Only 27% of women EC members hold P&L roles, compared to 67% of men. Given that P&L experience is crucial for the CEO roles, this gap suggests that there is still a way to go before we start seeing more women in the top job (Figure 4).

In fact, women CEOs continue to be rarity in Switzerland, as there is only one woman in the CEO role among SMI companies (Hanneke Faber at Logitech) and two in SMIM (Magdalena Martullo-Blocher at EMS-Chemie and Geraldine Picaud at SGS). On a more positive note, Swiss companies are increasingly appointing women to CFO role, with women holding 15% of SMI CFO and 26% of SMIM CFO roles in 2024.

Internal training and development remain a critical factor in improving the representation and opportunities for women executives, as evidenced by the fact that 62% of women EC members in 2024 were internally developed and appointed (Figure 5).

Figure 4: Gender distribution across Executive Committee roles in SMI companies

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information.

Figure 5: Share of women hired from outside vs. developed from within the company in 2024

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information | * Max. two years with the company at the time of EC appointment (to allow for on-boarding or transition period)

Notable tenure differences between leadership populations

Women who left their EC roles in SMI and SMIM companies last year held their positions on average for 3.1 years. Conversely, men stayed in the role for an average of seven years. Additionally, more than half of the men who left their EC roles did so after staying in it for more than six years, whereas all the women who departed their EC roles had stayed for four years or less (Figure 6). This confirms the trend of the last three years that, on average, women have significantly shorter tenures than men.

Figure 6: Number of former EC members by tenure and gender in SMI & SMIM companies in 2024

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information.

In 2024, we observed more international EC appointments than years prior (Figure 7). However, Swiss citizens have longer tenures (7+ years) compared to their international peers, with Americans having an average tenure of less than four years (Figure 8). These gaps are likely due to language, travel, and cultural differences.

Figure 7: Newly appointed EC members by nationality and gender in SMI & SMIM companies in 2024

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information.

Figure 8: Average tenure of EC-members who left in 2024

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information.

Sustainability remains a key business priority

Sustainability remains a key focus for Swiss businesses, as 19 of the 20 SMI companies have tied a portion (on average, 6%) of their executive’s remuneration to ESG KPIs (Figure 9). Additionally, 35% of SMI companies, i.e., Givaudan, Holcim, Sika, ABB, Kuehne + Nagel, Richemont and Swisscom, have a chief sustainability officer on the executive committee.

Figure 9: Number of SMI companies with compensation link to ESG

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Analysis 2025, covering executive committees of 47 companies in SMI and SMIM (with Lindt & Sprüngli, Roche and Schindler represented twice in indices). Based on company communication and publicly available information.

Jasmine Jenny, Partner at Russell Reynolds Associates, notes, “While the 2025 analysis shows high CEO and executive committee turnover with more women appointments, persistent gaps in leadership roles show that we are not benefiting from the broadest possible pool of leadership talent. Additionally, gender and nationality-based tenure differences highlight ongoing challenges once the position is achieved. However, a strong emphasis on sustainability remains, with most SMI companies tying executive compensation to ESG targets.”

To receive a more comprehensive copy of the study or to talk about the findings, please reach out to our team.

Authors

Jasmine Jenny is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO and Financial Officers practices. She is based in Zurich.
Alexandra Ettlin is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial & Natural Resources and Healthcare practices. She is based in Zurich.

Swiss Executive Committee Landscape: Higher Turnover Amid Global Volatility

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices