Session 8: How CEOs in the Industrial and Natural Resources Industry are Adopting AI—and Their Top Lessons for Success | RRA AI CEO Lab | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Session 8: How CEOs in the Industrial and Natural Resources Industry are Adopting AI—and Their Top Lessons for Success

RRA AI CEO Lab

RRA experts and leading CEOs in the industrial and natural resources industry share lessons on how to unlock the vast potential of AI.

Three key takeaways from our conversation with CEOs whose organizations are actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology.

One of the greatest risks of AI is not moving fast enough to test, learn, and implement.

AI is not just a technology challenge, but a leadership challenge.

Leaders need to blend top-down mandates with a culture of experimentation.

The risk is that if you are not part of this, your competition will surpass you, so you better get on board and get in front of it.”

CEO attendee
RRA AI CEO Labs

How CEOs in the industrial and natural resources industry are adopting AI

01. For productivity and efficiency. Attendees focused on how AI could help with the downsizing of mundane or routine tasks, as well as reducing engineering complexity. Several CEOs spoke of the advantages of using AI to forecast machine maintenance, or to help machines self-diagnose problems. Pattern recognition, predictive production and inventory management, and reduction in the time and cost of R&D were also referenced as key AI opportunities.

02. To gain competitive edge. CEOs spoke of how AI provides the opportunity to free up resources and dollars for better innovation or customer service. As one shared: “The biggest impact of AI is on internal productivity. That will allow us to shift dollars to developing products and services for customers. Those who can do that shift sooner will get a competitive advantage.” Or, as another said: “The most important part of this is that the amount of technology we now have to improve reliability for our customers is as high as it has ever been.”

Key lessons from CEOs whose organizations are actively adopting AI

Our attendees shared the opportunities, challenges, and lessons they faced when implementing AI across their organizations.

Lesson 1: One of the greatest risks of AI is not moving fast enough

The group discussed how AI-powered transformation delivers not only opportunities for their organizations, but also risks. A top concern was cybersecurity, with CEOs sharing that the very characteristics that make AI powerful, such as its ability to process large amounts of data, can also create vulnerabilities that cyber attackers exploit. As one CEO said: “It looks astonishingly real that AI will be a cyber risk topic very soon.”

Regulatory complexity was another concern. While regulations around ethical and responsible AI are still being written, there were fears that government efforts to regulate the technology may become overbearing. “There is a risk that governments will over-regulate the situation, so we’ll need a ton of compliance people to try to understand the intricacies of laws and policies,” one CEO said. Another CEO agreed, sharing: “What I see is that Americans innovate on AI and then Europeans regulate it before it’s even here.”

However, CEOs believed that the greatest risk of AI was inaction. As one said: “The risk is that if you are not part of this, your competition will surpass you, so you better get on board and get in front of it.” Some did caution that organizations need to be careful around being a first mover in the AI space—and that while you would have an advantage of being first, you run the risk of making large and costly mistakes, putting your reputation as an “AI driver” at stake. Yet, overall, attendees were clear that AI was an opportunity not to be missed.

Lesson 2: AI is not just a technology challenge, but a leadership challenge

CEOs also discussed the importance of thinking beyond AI adoption as a technical implementation and infrastructure challenge. While the group agreed that prior digitization efforts were critical to unlocking the benefits of AI, they also recognized that AI transformation was first and foremost a leadership challenge. As one CEO said: “At the end of the day, business is about people. If you think about AI as a change initiative on steroids, and then add regulations and risks on top, it’s going to be a leadership challenge, rather than a technology challenge.”
There was recognition that AI adoption and implementation starts at the top—led by an AI-informed CEO. As Jens-Thomas Pietralla, co-lead of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Board & CEO Advisory Partners Practice and member of RRA’s Industrial & Natural Resources sector, said: “AI is something that’s been here for a while. But the acceleration that we have recently experienced—and that will undoubtedly be with us for years to come—means that we as leaders need to find answers on how to adopt this fast and at scale.”

The group spoke about the importance of functional teams breaking free from siloes to work together in a networked manner. Without this, there can be no meaningful transformation, they said. Key strategies included investing in personal learning, distinguishing hype from practical applications, and fostering a culture of innovation and cross-functional collaboration. “The challenge for the CEO is making sure that the interplay across all functions is a lot better,” one CEO said. “You’ve really got to understand how everything comes together and that puts a lot of emphasis on the leadership ability of the CEO.”

There was also a recognition that curiosity and a high learning quotient (LQ) will be critical leadership skills in an AI age. As one CEO shared: “The large language models that are now available to the public were only published 1.5 years ago and thousands more are being developed right now. It is only just starting. We have no idea what’s coming at us. So, what we need is fascination, innovation, curiosity, and continuously trying to learn and understand what’s going on.”

Lesson 3: Leaders need to blend top-down mandates with a culture of experimentation

While AI implementation needs to be led from the top, there was recognition that CEOs must also foster a culture of experimentation across their wider organizations. As one CEO shared: “Innovation is so quick that we want to encourage small teams to experiment as quickly as possible without too much corporate direction. We want to promote it from the top down, but the action has to come from down below.”

The group discussed how it was critical that CEOs extinguished fear around the technology. Tristan Jervis, co-lead of RRA’s Technology Sector, shared how employees at one company had felt that AI was something that was “being done to them.” So, the CEO changed tack and promoted experimentation across the organization. “It has completely removed the barriers around protectionism and the management of data,” he said.

Ultimately, the goal is to lead top-down mandates while also ensuring innovation flourishes across the organization. As Tuck Rickards, a leadership advisor at RRA, said: “One of the terms that we hear a lot in our conversations with CEOs is "organized chaos." CEOs need to unleash experimentation and learning across the organization, while also bringing together a systems view around AI, so you can be thoughtful in bringing the full team ahead.”

View the previous session

Back to RRA AI CEO Lab main page

View the next session

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices