When you should (and shouldn’t) have an AI leader in the C-suite | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

When You Should (and Shouldn’t) Have an AI Leader in the C-suite

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersC-Suite Succession

Article

Fawad Bajwa

October 30, 2024

4 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersC-Suite Succession

Executive Summary

Chief AI Officers can define your AI strategy, but they’re not always the right fit. Here's how to find the best AI leader to suit your ambition.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

There’s a growing imperative for companies to take a comprehensive approach to AI–but do you really need a Chief AI Officer in the C-suite for that?

Many organizations today think hiring a Chief AI Officer role (or similar) is enough to get ahead of the GenAI curve. While these leaders can help define the AI strategy for the organization, they might not be right for every business. Who you need at the AI helm largely depends on what you want to achieve.

For some organizations, hiring someone in a big AI role might be the best approach. But in this Leadership Labs Insight, Fawad Bajwa, Russell Reynolds’ Global AI Practice Leader, argues it’s worth assessing the different types of people needed for your AI strategy, as well as your organization’s ambition in this space.

Read on to learn how to drive a connected and cohesive approach to AI that goes beyond a ‘one-and-done’ recruitment drive.

Do you really need a Chief AI Officer?

Developing a successful AI strategy is an issue that hasn’t gone unnoticed in boardrooms. CEOs are being asked about their approach, covering business model assessments, productivity improvements, and radical product innovation, as new technologies are being rolled out to just about every function in the business.

Some are looking to the Chief Information Officer (CIO) for a tech solution, while others are turning to their Chief Data Officer for answers. And while leadership teams grapple with an enterprise-level strategy that connects the dots, the easy answer might just be: hire a Chief AI Officer.

But when it comes to AI strategy, does it require a dedicated C-suite role?

The answer, of course, is that it depends.

If AI is an enabling technology for your organization, and will be focused on improving productivity across departments, then hiring an AI leader in the technology or operations function might be a better approach.

If your key focus for using AI is on improving customer experience and interaction, then having AI leaders in the commercial function will help you achieve that.

If your AI ambition is bigger, there’s great value in having a dedicated AI leader with deep expertise to work with the CEO to drive the strategy forward.

But the answer to capturing your AI opportunities and circumnavigating challenges might not be to just hire one, dedicated, person.

Applying AI is no longer just a tech opportunity. It’s a business transformation and radical product innovation opportunity. Here’s how to treat it as such.

3 roles to consider beyond a Chief AI Officer

So, if you’re looking for an AI leader that suits your organization’s ambitions, there are different roles you can consider beyond a straightforward Chief AI Officer. Here are three that can form part of a multi-faceted team to drive your goals forward.

1. AI Transformation leader

If an enterprise-wide view is essential to meet your wide-reaching AI strategy goals, you need someone on your team who has an enterprise-wide mandate. This person might be a broader transformation leader who isn’t necessarily deep in AI—but they do have to know the business really well, have experience in leading, and be trusted within the organization. They can also hire AI leaders supporting them to make the transformation happen, working across the various functions.

2. AI Product leader

If you want radical product innovation using AI, you need someone with a strong product background to get into the weeds of how AI can connect to your offering. This person will connect the voice of the customer to the technical realities of what is possible, and help bring new innovation to market, making the best of emerging technologies.

3. AI Innovation leader

If you’re looking for someone to push the organization’s thinking in terms of the art of the possible, you need someone at the very top who understands the business, as well as the possibilities AI can accomplish to elevate your entire organization. This could be one or two people, and they might already exist internally—it might even be your CEO.

But they need a nuanced understanding of the practical possibilities of AI and what it can achieve for your company, so sometimes it’s better to fill that role from someone on the ground. This could be a business leader or, if it’s the right fit for your organization, this is where a Chief AI Officer comes in.

Whether you pick and choose from these roles or decide you need all three, the benefit of the three-pronged approach is a team of deep technologists and data scientists, paired with leaders who know your business really well.

When you do need a Chief AI Officer

Now I’ve made my case against a sole C-suite level dedicated AI hire, I’m going to do a 180 and tell you when you actually should hire one.

If you are an ambitious company and looking to make a market shift and/or take a holistic view of your assets, then you do need a senior AI expert who is going to help you piece all this together.

A Chief AI Officer in the C-suite is a strategic systems thinker with an enterprise view. Someone who understands the nuances of the business, the voice of the customer, a sense of each of the functions, and what it would take to bring new, AI-enabled products to market. They’ll help define your AI strategy, all while keeping potential legal and ethical issues in mind.

It could also be a good fit if you want an anchor hire to send a signal about the direction of your business. It can help attract strong AI talent to the company and show you’re serious about this growing technology.

With that said, we expect this to be a change management role. Once everyone is using AI seamlessly, just like we have with mobile technology or the internet, we won’t need people to help figure out how to use it.

Today, we need leaders who can manage transformation, and those who understand the technology like the back of their hand.

Are you really ready for a Chief AI Officer?

The key to deciding whether a C-suite AI role is right for your business is defining the ambition of your business. Is AI changing the face of your products and services, or simply improving CX?

You also want to think about whether your tech infrastructure and data is in the right place to be undertaking a company-wide AI strategy—because you may need to do a more holistic, multi-prong transformation to capitalize on the available and fast improving technologies.

To that end, you might find that first you need a Chief Data Officer, before advancing to the world of AI.

That’s not to say that a Chief AI Officer is a redundant role: for the right company, they can form part of a leadership team driving change with deep expertise. They can help impact the bottom line, move into new markets, and transform industries with the strategic use of technologies.

But they’re also not a silver bullet. Before you jump to the big title, it pays to think about getting the right team in place to pull off such a large transformation.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in New York and Toronto.

How are you approaching AI transformation?

Join the conversation on leadership at Russell Reynolds Associates.

Find out more

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices