No Company Can Outperform Its Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

No Company Can Outperform Its Leadership

As business complexity increases, leaders’ preparedness falls. To adapt, organizations must evolve leadership approaches for the future.

CONNECT WITH OUR EXPERTS

Leadership has been mythologized across human history, and the history of business and modern organizations is no exception. The stories we’re told are typically stories about leaders: who they were and what they did. Rarely do these stories describe leadership as a collective endeavor.

But even in a classic hierarchy, where those at the top wield great power and influence over those below, the top leader does not succeed alone; they must marshal those around them. Conversely, their downfalls are often the result of power imbalances – echo chambers, hubris, and sycophancy being the poison that destroys them.

Organizations are, after all, complex human systems in which information, insight, ideas and (potential) value creation are highly distributed.  Whether information flows quickly in an unadulterated fashion, and whether it moves in multiple directions – breaking through hierarchy and silos – matters. Leadership determines whether an organization achieves its potential.  Now more than ever, leadership is a source of competitive advantage. Leadership is a multiplier, it is the engine of adaptation, and leaders should stand proud that they have an outsized opportunity to shape the fortunes of their organizations and those they serve.

Companies cannot outperform their leadership. As such, how we identify and develop the right leaders, and how we facilitate their success as a team, has never been more important. For leaders to create the conditions for their organizations to thrive both today and in the future, we need to intentionally evolve our leadership approach to match the fast changing world around us.

Why Leadership Needs to Evolve

Leadership teams are feeling less prepared

If there was ever any skepticism about the importance of a leader’s ability to navigate changing, complex issue sets, the volatility of the last four years has nullified that doubt.

Since early 2021, Russell Reynolds Associates has been tracking the issues most concerning to leaders. Uncertain economic growth and the availability of key talent/skills have consistently topped the list, while a set of other threats—changing consumer behavior, cyber threats, increased regulation, geo-political uncertainty, and technological change—have cycled in and out of their most pressing concerns.

Despite consistently appearing as the highest-ranked threats for leaders, repeated and long-term exposure to these issues has failed to build leadership resilience around them. While the exact blend of issues that any individual organization faces varies, we see a concerning trend:  currently, only 45% of leaders believe their executive team is prepared to deal with the top threats they face.

Importantly, this downward trend is not simply a feature of the issues that we see moving around the ranking of leaders’ top concerns — technology, regulation, and geo-politics, to name a few. It is also true for uncertain economic growth and talent availability, which have consistently occupied the top two spots in our ranking. Only 42% of leaders feel their executive team is prepared to deal with economic uncertainty and only a dismal 39% feel they are prepared to deal with talent availability, down from 65% and 55% in early 2021, respectively.

That’s not to say that leadership teams aren’t working hard to respond to the issues before them. They are communicating with multiple stakeholders about everything from armed conflicts to social justice movements to concerns about business practices. They are creating new roles and functions to own specific challenges and opportunities like sustainability and AI. And they are setting targets and publishing reports to build commitment and accountability.

Unfortunately, these efforts may be insufficient. For many leadership teams, addressing these multi-layered challenges has prevented them from recognizing the shifts beneath the surface that are fundamentally changing the nature of leadership—and often making their efforts feel futile. Unless they address these shifts, they risk getting stuck in a cycle of reacting and responding, rather than creating the conditions for leaders to build the resilience and adaptability leaders need.

Five shifts make leading harder today

From independent to intertwined issues: Issues and events are stacking up on top of each other, interacting with each other and compounding complexity. In the geo-political space alone, organizations are contending with the continued war in Ukraine, the conflict in Gaza and its destabilizing effect on the region, the dynamics of US-China relations, and elections across a notable proportion of the globe.  These issues are not self-contained; they often intertwine with other considerations for leaders – financial performance, market access, supply chains, and attracting and retaining critical talent.

From incremental change to radical disruption: Issues with the power to disrupt or destroy industries are appearing and taking hold with unprecedented speed. In part, this is a result of the globally interconnected nature of our economies and businesses today, meaning that a sudden disruption to the supply of a specific material or trade route can have big implications for a business. But it is also about innovation waves compressing. That is to say: disruptive innovations are presenting more frequently, and as those waves compress, their peaks get higher. The prize for those that catch them gets larger (as does the risk for those that do not). As both competitive innovation and external events like the Covid-19 pandemic challenge organizations’ business models and operational fundamentals, the speed with which companies (or whole industries) disappear is increasing.

From a vertical to a horizontal presentation: The issues that organizations face no longer present vertically (impacting a single function or business unit)—they present horizontally (across functions and business units). As such, leaders need to work with and through one another to effectively solve them. Take AI: beyond the obvious point that AI has applications across businesses, capturing the AI opportunity is more than a technical exercise—it is an exercise in culture and transformation. Answering questions about culture, ethics, safety, and new models of work requires a level of collaboration and engagement that many top-teams are not designed to accommodate.

From single to multiple time horizons: Leaders are being asked to contribute to solving big societal problems – like climate change – which requires them to engage in bold action and investments that may (or may not) payoff across decades. At the same time, they are expected to drive short-term profits, and react to competitive disruptions and hot-button social issues.  Being agile and responsive in the moment, while also making transformational decisions and investments, is hugely challenging.

From unitary and clear expectations to plural and polarized ones: Business leaders face huge expectations. Increased stakeholder diversity – from shareholders to employees to the public – poses a very real challenge. And the reality is that it is nigh-on-impossible to align everyone’s expectations.  What’s more, when these social media-fueled “conversations” play out in the public eye, the bias towards promoting outrage skews our perceptions of reality.  Managing expectations is time consuming and emotionally taxing. While accepting that you are unlikely to please all stakeholders is part of being a leader and making good decisions, now leaders must also accept that they may be dragged through the mud for doing so.

Redefining Successful Leadership for a Fast-Changing World

Regardless of their experience, skill, vision and perseverance, it is impossible for any single leader to address these five shifts by themselves. Instead, it requires an approach that understands leadership as a collective endeavor, underpinned by a commitment to a long-term destination. This enterprise approach is the key to crafting resilient and adaptable leadership and involves:

Demonstrating an enterprise mindset: Leaders must have an understanding of and commitment to the effectiveness, goals, and strategies of the entire enterprise—not just their own unit. They should prioritize actions and decisions that are most in service of the entire enterprise’s success (even if that means trading off on their own individual outcomes).

Applying expertise: Leaders must possess and apply strong expertise and excellence in their area of responsibility – be that a function, geography, or business unit. The generalist approach is out.

Taking full ownership: Additionally, they must take full ownership for their teams, effectively organizing and deploying them to achieve relevant goals and outputs, owning their successes and failures.

Engaging in productive collaboration: They should assume responsibility for how all parts of the business come together, working to address internal friction points openly and constructively, and knowing how and when they need to work with, through, and for other leaders to solve problems and capture opportunities.

And orienting themselves around two core principles:

Stewardship: Leaders must balance the ability to deliver the year, with a long-term view. A clear understanding and commitment to the long-term destination, combined with an ability to prioritize investments and actions accordingly. This focus on the long-term health and capability of the enterprise is perhaps best epitomized by a deep responsibility for developing the next generation of leaders.

Service: They need to recognize that frontline employees – those that serve customers and build and design the organization’s products and services – are central to value creation.  Leaders need to ensure that the enterprise’s focus goes beyond demonstrating appreciation for these employees, and also enables them to be successful by recognizing the knowledge and innovations they can contribute.

To build this enterprise leadership approach, organizations must focus on both the individual and how they operate within the collective endeavor that is modern leadership.

The Individual: How do we develop, select, and engage leaders with the right experience, leadership span, and potential to lead effectively amidst complexity and uncertainty?

The Team: How do we enable effective alignment, trust, and collaboration amongst a group of individuals with diverse skills, experience and motivations?

How to Enable Leadership Change and Evolution

The Individual: Evolving our understanding of what makes a good leader

As these five shifts further complicate leadership, we need a new approach for identifying, developing, and selecting our seniormost leaders. While existing assessment models identify rising talent, they have been less effective at differentiating leaders who are already succeeding at the executive level. To help organizations understand the best predictors of success among leadership teams within our changing business context, Russell Reynolds Associates created Leadership Portrait.

Built upon years of proprietary research, the Leadership Portrait model encompasses an executive’s readiness to meet immediate challenges—their relevant experience and leadership competencies—as well as their future potential—their growth factors and their ability to realize their full potential.

RRA Leadership Portrait

How can organizations unlock senior executive potential?

In this tumultuous, high-stakes environment, how can organizations identify leaders who are both adept at predicting and preparing for change and keeping their organization steady through the day-to-day? By measuring the executive potential of their leaders at the top.

Discover How

Growth factors—or, a leader’s ability to continue driving growth in the face of change—include systemic thinking, learning and adaptability, drive and resilience, and social intelligence. But growth factors alone are insufficient. Leaders who successfully realize their full potential also demonstrate a high degree of self-knowledge around their strengths and limitations, a defined set of decision-driving values and aspirations, and clear goals regarding their impact on others and the long-term implications of their leadership legacy.

While a leader may index more on growth factors or potential realization, the two are intrinsically intertwined. If growth factors indicate the height of an individual’s “ceiling,” potential realization is the sturdiness of their supporting walls.

The key paradigm shift: Making it to the top job is not the realization of potential. As the world grows more complicated, roles will continually change, and the bar will continually reset. As such, potential realization is an ongoing journey that even the most senior executives must contend with as the context and challenges around them change.

And it is important to recognize that they should not go on that journey alone. Even the most well-rounded leaders – be that the CEO or another C-suite leader – are not super-heroes. Organizations must invest in supporting leaders as they adapt to their new roles and develop within a shifting context.  Structured transition support and mentoring that blends internal colleagues and external advisors can be hugely powerful.

The Team: Building and monitoring leadership team health

Developing, selecting, and supporting strong leaders is critical, but getting them to deliver on the enterprise leadership approach needed for today’s world also requires an intentional focus on overall leadership team health. We expect our top leaders to create the conditions for success across the organization, but they cannot do this if their team isn’t functioning properly. As such, we must carefully consider and manage the conditions for success for the entire leadership team.

There are five dimensions of leadership team health that are important to understand and actively manage: capability and skills, composition and structure, commitment and alignment, culture and behavior, and continuity and succession. And unfortunately, our research shows notable gaps across all of these today:

Capability and skill: Are the skills and experience represented on the team relevant to operating the business today, driving forward looking strategy, and responding to external threats and opportunities?

Only 28% of leaders feel that their C-suite displays adaptability and resilience through uncertainty. Furthermore, only 28% of leaders agree that their C-suite feels comfortable and informed to make strategic decisions.

Composition and structure: Is the size of the team and nature of its roles suited to the maturity of the organization and its progress on a strategic journey? Moreover, does the team have strong diversity in skills, experience, backgrounds, and demographics?

Only 21% of leaders feel that the composition of their C-suite team aligns with the vision or strategy of the organization, and only 22% of leaders feel that their C-suite represents a breadth of skills, background, and experience.

Commitment and alignment: Does the team have a clear purpose and goal alignment that enables enterprise success in the short- and long-term?

Only 39% of leaders feel their C-suite displays a strong commitment to organizational purpose, and only 30% of leaders feel their C-suite demonstrates accountability and ownership of organizational performance.

Culture and behavior: Does the team’s culture generate trust and space for productive disagreement, while engendering “cabinet solidarity” once decisions are made?  Are leaders stewards of the firm’s broader culture and building trust across multiple levels to ensure they are not subject to information filters?

Only 26% of leaders indicate that their team articulates an inspiring vision that aligns with organizational values, and only 22% of leaders feel that their C-suite displays a high level of trust that is visible across multiple levels of the organization.

Continuity and succession: Is there a deep, diverse, and engaged pipeline of next-generation leaders?  Are leaders leveraging the expertise of next-gen leaders in their decision making and actively investing in their development and retention?

Only a dismal 14% of leaders say their C-suite regularly reviews engagement, development, and retention plans. And only 11% of leaders feel that their C-suite team provides appropriate exposure to next generation leaders.

Evolving leadership for today and tomorrow

The speed of change will continue to accelerate, making leadership contexts more complex. Thriving in that unknown future will require a resilient and adaptable enterprise leadership approach.

How we identify, develop, and select the right individuals for leadership, and how we create the conditions for them to succeed as a team, has never been more important. Because no company can outperform its leadership.  And for leaders to perform successfully today and tomorrow – creating an environment in which the organization can thrive over the long-term – we need to intentionally evolve our approach to leadership to match the fast changing world around us.

Individual leaders (and perhaps especially those at the very top) will need to continually evolve and grow as the shifting context around them forces an ongoing evaluation of their roles and how they create impact. Moreover, we must think about the leadership team as a living organism and actively monitor and manage its health, rather than periodically intervening when its vitals are flashing red.

Authors

Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.

Bob Marcus is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in New York.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank a group of key colleagues whose valuable perspective and expertise was crucial to the development of this research:

Gretchen Anderson leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Culture capability. She is based in Baltimore.

Jamie Hechinger co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education practice. She is based in Washington D.C.

David Lange leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Development capability. He is based in Chicago.

Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Practice in the Americas. She is based in San Francisco.

Justus O’Brien leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Family Enterprise practice and is a senior member of the Board & CEO Practice. He is based in Stamford.

Dean Stamoulis is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in Atlanta.

Aimee Williamson is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. She is based in Sydney.

Anita Wingrove is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. She is based in Melbourne.

Leadership Portrait

How can organizations understand and unlock senior executive potential?

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Ready to start your FUTURE-READY LEADERSHIP journey?

Speak to a consultant

The Future of Leadership

The world is changing. Here’s how leadership needs to change with it

Learn more

How can organizations identify leaders who are both adept at predicting and preparing for change and keeping their organization steady?

Discover how

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices