Lessons For Hiring and Developing the Next Generation of Energy Transition Leaders | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Lessons For Hiring and Developing the Next Generation of Energy Transition Leaders

Sustainable LeadershipPortfolio Company LeadershipIndustrialEnergy and Natural ResourcesBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

Article

June 03, 2025

11 min

Sustainable LeadershipPortfolio Company LeadershipIndustrialEnergy and Natural ResourcesBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

Executive Summary

In a changing industry, we offer lessons for hiring and developing energy transition leaders, based on six key characteristics they display.

Close

Abigail Skerrett

London

Stephen Schoenberger

Boston

Katy Schawe

Houston

The energy industry is entering a new phase.

The energy transition executives whose psychometric profiles we analyzed lead companies operating in the following industries (among others): wind, solar and geothermal power development and operations; renewable fuels; electricity generation, transmission and distribution; energy management solutions; bioplastics; electrified transportation.

Some assessed executives were leading a new energy business line within a traditional energy company.

While corporations and investors alike continue to prioritize actions that improve the global energy system’s environmental sustainability, recent geopolitical and technological developments have brought energy security concerns to the forefront.

Energy companies today – be they utilities, privately backed renewable energy developers, national or international energy companies – are facing challenges at every turn including through:

Economic uncertainty,

A lack of government clarity in some markets,

Potential supply chain disruptions,

Accelerated AI-driven growth in electricity demand, and

For many oil and gas companies, a return to reliance on fossil fuels production as a way to satisfy shareholders’ expectations.

In a context of elevated uncertainty, hiring and developing outstanding leaders is more important than ever. But how can CHROs, CEOs and boards at energy transition companies (and the private capital funds investing in them) identify the next cohort of executives who will lead their organization through today’s uncertainty and into the future? What personality and leadership traits do top-performing executives within these organizations most typically display?

To answer these questions, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed the Hogan psychometric profiles of 54 energy leaders and conducted interviews with a subset of them, contributing to the quotes used throughout this piece. Executives in the sample are distributed across global geographies and hold roles such as CEO, COO, president, and other N-1 operational or commercial roles. We collected their data from recent executive assessments and a proprietary outreach effort that took place in 2024.

Hogan’s assessment tools score individuals across 28 metrics including: their day-to-day behavioral tendencies (HPI), how they perform under pressure (HDS), and their motivations and drivers (MVPI). Through the lens of an industrial-organizational psychologist, the quantitative and qualitative data provides rich insights into an individual’s core preferences, derailers, and interests.

Via this analysis, RRA has identified six key characteristics that are consistently found among energy transition leaders. Read on to learn more about these common characteristics, as well as recommendations for managers looking to hire, retain, and develop top energy transition leadership talent.

What’s powering energy transition leaders? An exploration of six key characteristics through their Hogan profiles

1. Informed Innovator

Energy transition leaders demonstrate an informed and innovative leadership style, as evidenced by their scores on measures of continuous learning, self-reliance, and curiosity. These leaders are more likely to stay informed on market and political movements, external customer needs, and what’s required to drive leading/best practices. Additionally, they are comfortable breaking from tradition when industry trends signal changing winds. They don’t feel beholden to the ways of the past and enjoy being recognized for their willingness to challenge the status quo.

Recommendations
Explore how your candidates have approached innovation in the past. Look for signs that they have successfully applied their knowledge of cutting-edge market trends to discover improved and novel solutions to traditional problems, and ask for examples of how they’ve shared that knowledge with team members, keeping them both engaged and informed.

Once in role, consider how a disruptive innovator is likely to be received by your organization’s culture. Ensure that you are creating meaningful space for these leaders to drive change, while also supporting them on how to build followership in your company. This balance is critical for energy transition leaders to achieve their fullest potential.

Digital transformation is one of the big problems to solve, and in the Renewable Energy Industry, we are years behind other industries. Today, if we consider the data available in the assets under generation, we are not even taking profit of 3% of it. Having access to data and organizing it under industrial standards will allow us to conduct proper analytics, implement preventive solutions, and develop ML/AI codes to continuously improve asset performance and increase the renewable capacity connected to the grid.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

The leader must be a pioneer in data and AI. If digital transformation is not one of your top priorities, your company is not going to be in the game. To possess both this knowledge and the ability to drive it as a leader is unique; perhaps you need someone willing to take the risks.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

2. Drives Engagement

Energy transition leaders inspire engagement, as evidenced by their psychometric scores on measures pertaining to networking, pleasure-seeking, and visual appeal. They are observant and persuasive communicators who create compelling environments that invite others in and foster engagement. Through connection, clarity of mission, and magnetic appeal, they drive buy-in and inspire authentic passion for the work.

Energy transition leaders often lead with inclusivity and are open to a wide range of perspectives. They are thoughtful about how information needs to look and feel to influence both internal and external stakeholders.

Recommendations
Watch for examples of a candidate’s ability to bring others together and assemble diverse perspectives. Explore how their passion and mission-focus has influenced and impacted others around them in the past. To understand how they might approach and influence stakeholders, ask candidates to present a vision they’ve aligned with others around, or how they would drive strategy in their future organization.

Establishing a “continuous learning culture” and empowering people and teams is critical to developing the dynamism needed to drive success in a highly competitive environment.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

The people attracted to our industry want to work for a purpose, to change the planet. The directive, authoritarian leadership style of the past no longer works well. Our employee population wants to be engaged; they want to be heard. In this industry, more than others, if you don’t lead with collaboration first, you will not be able to attract and retain the scarce talent.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

3. Politically Savvy

Energy transition leaders exhibit high political savviness through their scores on measures of interpersonal style, trust in others, and social skill. They typically possess the strong relationship-building skills needed to navigate legacy ecosystems that may be resistant to change – if they can demonstrate patience.

Motivated by big ideas and industry disruption, their action orientation may appear as rule-breaking or lacking consideration for their organization’s practical limitations. They can occasionally grow frustrated if bureaucracy slows the pace of change.

Recommendations
Explore how your candidates approach stakeholders and systems that are resistant to change. Candidates who express high levels of patience and a willingness to accept some strategic compromises are likely to fare better in more complex or bureaucratic environments. Ensure that referencing provides a clear perspective on the candidate's ability to build strong relationships, adapt to new cultures, and approach change mandates with an appropriate long-term view.

Credibility, strong role model behavior and transparent communication are the key leadership elements that create the right team spirit, allowing the organization to find the best solutions and answers for today’s questions.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

We see many leaders coming from large energy companies who say they are frustrated by bureaucracy. What they don’t realize is they will still have major investors who need a lot of data before approving decisions, and they won’t have carte blanche to make decisions.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

4. Optimistic Experimenter

Energy transition leaders tend to be highly optimistic around experimentation, as evidenced by their scores on measures of resilience and consistency. They maintain a hopeful tenacity in the face of adversity. With a “glass half full” personality, they are motivated by uncovering new solutions when they encounter novel problems, rather than becoming complacent.

Energy transition leaders are well-versed in constant market evolutions, new technology development, volatile government sentiment towards subsidies, and frequent changes in the cost of capital. As a result, these leaders must be comfortable “failing forward,” modelling the resiliency to try again. High-performing energy transition executives are likely to nurture team environments that champion this experimentation mindset and boldly venture into unfamiliar commercial opportunities.

Recommendations
Seek to understand a candidate’s ability to drive experimentation under uncertain macro or business conditions; for example, ask them for evidence of where they have forged new partnerships through first-of-a-kind commercial agreements. Listen for situations in which they faced a significant setback, assessing their response and whether they maintained forward momentum. Reflect on how their approach is likely to resonate with other senior leaders in these high-pressure moments.

Our success factors are so volatile and sometimes things change overnight. It is important to have the right organizational set up that meets the high skills and high expectations of your employees.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

The next leaders will need to be innovators and experimenters. To be successful, we are constantly developing possible solutions and everything is new. Everything is experimenting and not giving up.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

5. (Too) Big Picture

As indicated by their scores pertaining to ideation and delegation, energy transition leaders are often big-picture thinkers who operate with a long-term industry-wide view.  They tend to enjoy operating at 40,000 feet, and are less inclined to become mired in details, nitpick errors, or micromanage reports.

Energy transition leaders tend to forge ahead in ambiguous situations, even when ideas may seem eccentric or unfocused to others. Their ability to envision efforts holistically allows these leaders to engage stakeholders and “sell” them on ambitious projects. However, they are most successful when complemented by detail and process-oriented partners who can ensure that technology and commercial strategies are delivered, and milestones are achieved with appropriate attention to timeline and cost.

Recommendations
Driven by their focus on big ideas, energy transition leaders occasionally introduce risk by overlooking the importance of process and the due diligence that investors or stakeholders may require. Investigate how your candidate has carried a strategic plan through to implementation, and probe how much detail they can recall and relay. Delving into their self-awareness will be critical to understanding how they intentionally balance their strengths and gaps with complementary talent to build a well-balanced and competent management team that can deliver, as well as articulate, performance against specific KPIs.

Once in role, big-picture leaders will benefit from a hands-on board, as directors can lend strong sector knowledge and the judgement and business acumen to appropriately challenge strategy. In combination, this kind of strong support system helps de-risk energy transition leaders’ vision, translating big ideas into concrete results over a realistic period of time.

You must find balance in your organization too. You need operations leaders who can push, but the pragmatic voices in functional roles – CFO, legal, etc. – are critical to ensure focus and structure.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

The CEOs are so good at selling and strategy but their ability to drill into the details is not always there. You ideally need to hire structured operators to counterbalance the externally facing, visionary CEO.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

6. Impact Over Comfort

Energy transition leaders are often motivated by impact over personal gains, as evidenced by their scores on measures of variety seeking, generosity, helping others, and risk-taking.

Driven by the mission — rather than personal financial security and wealth — energy transition leaders tend to place higher value on market impact, innovation, and ability to drive change at significant scale. They emphasize changing the world over individual legacy and are willing to risk personal financial reward – even failure – for the sake of pioneering a new technology or market in support of decarbonization. As a result, they may see profitability or immediate value creation as secondary to global impact.

Recommendations
Striking a balance between impact and financial performance is critical to the success of energy transition leaders, particularly those backed by funds and investors who seek more rapid financial returns. Explore how your candidate has balanced these priorities while maintaining the confidence and support of investors. Review their business performance track record and consider seeking reference points from investors with whom the candidate has previously worked.

Identifying talent that shares a passion for long-term impact is one of our most important challenges. Renewable businesses are focused on value creation but have a different operating style compared to traditional energy organizations. We must deliver value with more agility and speed.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

Typically, CEOs in the renewable industry want as much financial alignment with the business as possible. They are willing to go so far as risking reinvesting part of their end of year bonus into company stocks.

Energy Transition Executive Assessment Participant

The right leader for a new phase of the energy transition

Transitioning to an environmentally sustainable energy and industrial system remains an inescapable priority, which means energy transition organizations need executives who are big thinkers and mission-driven. However, the current economic and geopolitical context also requires businesses and investors to empower leaders who can find balance between idealism and practicality.

As hiring managers and boards work to identify and develop the next generation of energy transition leaders, we hope that this analysis serves as a guiding reference. Organizations should look for leaders who demonstrate the ability to keep individual goals and motivators in line with an environment that often requires reliance on process, metrics, and results presented through careful analysis.

As the energy industry resets its expectations, passion and financial returns need to be more strictly linked. Simultaneously, organizations are likely to attract and retain the best talent if they demonstrate patience: delivering on an energy transition strategy is a process that often requires a multi-decade investment.

Authors

Marc Baca co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Power & Utilities practice. He is based in Houston.
Erin Marie Collins is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment and Development team. She is based in Melbourne.
Mauro Gimenez leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Industrial and Natural Resources sector. He is based in Houston.
J. Hewins co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice for Industrial and Natural Resources in the Americas. He is based in San Francisco.
Francesco Menonna is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources Knowledge team. He is based in New York City.
Randy Octuck is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment and Development Knowledge team. He is based in San Francisco.
Katy Schawe is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. She is based in Houston.
Stephen Schoenberger co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Energy Transition practice in the Americas. He is based in Boston.
Abigail Skerrett co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Energy Transition practice in EMEA. She is based in London.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to give particular thanks to Eduardo Medina, CEO at RES Energy, and Barbara Flesche, Executive Vice President Europe at Statkraft for their time and valuable perspectives in addition to all the industry leaders who lent time to this effort.

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices