The Path to Financial Officer Success in India: BSE 100 CFO Trends & Turnover | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Path to Financial Officer Success in India: BSE 100 CFO Trends & Turnover

SuccessionFinance OfficersInclusion and Culture

Article

April 25, 2025

7 min

SuccessionFinance OfficersInclusion and Culture

Executive summary

Key findings from RRA’s 2024 analysis of chief financial officer success path and turnover in India’s top 100 BSE-listed corporations.

Close

Vinita Katara

Mumbai
New Delhi

Rahul Thapar

Mumbai
New Delhi

*TOP 100 - Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed the top 100 listed companies from  BSE (formerly Bombay Stock Exchange) Limited, excluding public sector enterprises (wholly or partially government owned). Data was collected in December 2024.

The year 2024 marked a notable uptick in chief financial officer (CFO) transitions within the Bombay Stock Exchange's top 100 companies, with turnover rising to 24% from a previous low of 15% in 2023. This increase is largely attributed to a higher rate of retirements and a growing trend of CFOs advancing to roles beyond their financial positions.

Russell Reynolds Associates conducted an analysis of the CFO profiles within the top 100 BSE-listed companies (excluding public sector enterprises), hereinafter referred to as the TOP 100. Our research showcases key trends and insights in India’s CFO demographics and experience, as well as their impact on value creation and turnover rates.

Key statistics:

62%

Of CFOs are internally promoted

56%

Are first time CFOs

5%

Of CFOs are women

60%

Have controllership & tax background

57%

Have single-sector experience

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

Internal CFO appointments favored, many of them first-time CFOs

Companies in the TOP 100 favor internal CFO promotions, with 62% of TOP 100 CFOs coming from within the organization. Sector-wise, technology sees the highest rate of internal CFO appointments at 70%, contrasting with healthcare / pharma, which has the lowest at 55% (figure 1a). Among the TOP 100 CFOs, 56% are serving in their first CFO role, while the remaining 44% have previous CFO experience (figure 1b).

Figure 1a: Internal vs. external CFO appointments for TOP 100 by sector

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024,

based on publicly available data, N = 100

Figure 1b: CFO experience amongst TOP 100 CFOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

Breaking this down further: among those CFOs appointed internally (62% of total), a significant 79% are first-time CFOs, while the remaining 21% are experienced CFOs, having previously held CFO roles at smaller organizations (figure 1c). In contrast, among externally hired CFOs, only 18% are first-time CFOs, suggesting a strong preference for experienced CFOs when recruiting from outside the company.

This points to a broader trend in which companies lean towards seasoned leaders for external hires, but are more willing to promote first-time candidates from within. Notably, a third of TOP 100 CFOs were appointed in the last two years, and another third in the last two to four years (figure 1d).

Figure 1c: CFO experience by internal vs. external appointments for TOP 100

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

Figure 1d: TOP 100 tenure in current CFO role

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

Women hold only 5% of the CFO roles in the TOP 100

Women continue to be underrepresented in CFO roles within the TOP 100, holding only 5% of these positions (figure 2a). Of these, four women CFOs ascended through internal development and promotion, while one was recruited externally. To enhance diversity at the executive level, it’s crucial to invest in building and nurturing diverse talent pipelines internally. Such investments are essential for advancing meaningful change in leadership diversity.

Figure 2a: TOP 100 CFOs by gender

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

TOP 100 organizations view Qualified Chartered Accountant CFOs with Controllership experience as a safe bet

Companies traditionally prefer CFOs who are qualified Chartered Accountants, as evidenced by 73% of TOP 100 CFOs holding a CA qualification, of which 10% also possess an MBA in Finance (figure 3a). Moreover, 60% of these TOP 100 CFOs have ascended through the Finance Controllership and Accounting route, complemented by skills in business partnering. However, there is a growing trend toward hiring CFOs with diverse financial backgrounds, including Investment Banking. The shift toward a broader strategic impact and value creation is evident, as 40% of CFOs now come from varied backgrounds such as Business Finance, Corporate Finance, and Investment Banking. This reflects India companies' efforts to modernize finance functions and prioritize strategic over traditional accounting and control expertise in their leadership roles.

Figure 3a: TOP 100 CFOs educational backgrounds

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

Figure 3b: TOP 100 CFOs backgrounds, by prior experience

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

More appetite to recruit CFOs with multi-sector experience

Overall, 57% of TOP 100 CFOs possess deep sector experience within the specific domains (figure 4a). Due to regulatory requirements, financial services gravitates towards CFOs with exclusively single-sector experience (figure 4b). On the other hand, there has been growing interest in recruiting CFOs with multi-sector experience, particularly in Industrial and Healthcare/Pharma sectors.

This shift indicates more openness to diverse expertise, aiming to integrate fresh perspectives and innovative approaches to financial management across industries. We have also seen that the technology sector is increasingly open to industry-agnostic CFOs. This trend is driven by a talent shortage within the sector and a noticeable migration of CFOs from large tech companies to mid-sized, high-growth firms.

Figure 4a: TOP 100 CFO sector experience

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

Figure 4b: TOP 100 CFO sector experience, by industry

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

The top seven value-creating companies are predominantly led by externally hired CFOs

When analyzing the top value creators amongst the TOP 100 and the CFO profiles that have influenced their growth over the past five years, a few trends emerged.

Market cap outperformance vs. benchmark

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ TOP 100 CFO analysis, data collected from RRA proprietary research in December 2024, based on publicly available data, N = 100

BSE 100 CFO turnover climbs after a dip in 2023

In 2024, the BSE 100 experienced 24 CFO transitions, elevating the turnover rate to 24%, a significant increase from the record low of 15% observed in 2023 (Figure 5a). Notably, sectors such as technology and financial services saw a year-over-year increase in turnover.

Figure 5a: YoY turnover trends for BSE 100 CFOs based on incoming CFOs, by sector and overall (2020-2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the BSE 100 from 2020 to 2024

In 2024, there were 22 outgoing CFOs. CFO transitions within the BSE 100 were evenly split, with 50% opting for new roles, while the other 50% either retired or moved into board-only positions (figure 5b). Among those who pursued new roles, 45% remained within their existing organizations, transitioning to CEO or divisional CEO roles.

Figure 5b: 2024 CFO exits – Where did they go next?

Source: RRA analysis of the BSE 100 in 2024. N = 22 outgoing CFOs. Note that in 2024, there were 24 new incoming CFOs appointed, but 22 outgoing CFOs – 2 had exited in the prior year.

Number of departing CFOs per new role

Source: RRA analysis of the BSE 100 in 2024. N = 22 outgoing CFOs

CFO retirement rates remain steady, but may see uptick in future

Over recent years, the pattern of CFO departures from BSE 100 companies has shown consistency, with 50% of those leaving choosing to retire or transition to board roles (figure 6). The average age of these TOP 100 CFOs is 53, with 13% of them aged over 60. Given these demographics, it’s likely that India's large capitalization companies will experience significant CFO turnover in the coming years, as more executives reach the age of superannuation.

Figure 6: YoY retirement rates for departing BSE 100 CFOs (2020-2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the BSE 100 from 2020 to 2024. N = 19, 21, 24, 11, 22 outgoing CFOs in 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024 respectively.

Planning for BSE 100’s future financial leadership

The CFO transitions within the BSE 100 reveals a dynamic interplay of internal promotions, sector-specific dynamics, and changing demographics. With a notable number of retirements and an aging demographic among CFOs, proactive succession planning is critical to ensure organizational continuity and foster growth.

To effectively plan for the future of your financial leadership, we recommend:

Engage in ongoing career development conversations: As CFOs increasingly aspire to CEO roles, evaluate their potential as successors. Assess the competencies required for them to ascend to top executive positions, which may involve expanding their current roles or temporarily serving as COO or a division president/CEO to build these skills. Additionally, engage with and develop the next generation of talent within your organization.

Initiate retirement planning discussions: Anticipate and plan for upcoming CFO retirements by openly discussing their retirement intentions, informed by earlier career conversations.

Invest in succession planning: Following career planning discussions with your CFO, revisit your finance talent succession strategy to ensure alignment with your organizational timelines. Given the current lack of gender diversity in the pipeline, focus on the development and retention of women in finance roles. Evaluate the depth of your talent search, the effectiveness of your assessment and development approaches, and the robustness of your overall transition strategies.

Ensure a seamless CFO transition: Given that many CFOs are promoted from within, build confidence in promoting first-time CFOs by providing appropriate support, such as mentorship programs and team evaluations, to ensure they have the necessary resources to succeed.

By implementing these strategies, BSE 100 organizations can not only maintain a strong leadership pipeline, but also adapt to the dynamic CFO roles and expectations of today's corporate environment.

Authors

Vinita Katara is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Corporate Officers and Private Capital sectors. She is based in Mumbai.
Rahul Thapar is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Financial Officers, Private Capital and Technology sectors. He is based in Mumbai.
Kayanush Patel is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Financial Officers Research team. She is based in Mumbai.
Laura Syn leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Knowledge team in Asia Pacific. She is based in Hong Kong.
Catherine Schroeder leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.
Shira Ophir is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Chicago.
Avnish Kumar is part of the Data Services Team at WNS working with Russell Reynolds Associates’ Asia Pacific Knowledge team. He is based in Gurgaon, India.

Global CFO Turnover Index

To learn more about global CFO turnover trends, please visit RRA’s Global CFO Turnover Index.

Read More

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices