From Uncertainty to Opportunity: Essential Lessons for Leaders | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

From Uncertainty to Opportunity: Essential Lessons for Leaders

Leadership StrategiesCulture RiskLeadershipBoard of DirectorsChief Executive Officers

Article

+ 1 author

May 13, 2025

3 min

Leadership StrategiesCulture RiskLeadershipBoard of DirectorsChief Executive Officers

Executive Summary

By emphasizing values, empowering teams, and adapting playbooks, leaders can transform sudden, profound volatility into strategic advantage.

Close

Bob Marcus

New York

Margot McShane

San Francisco

Dee Symons

London

Erin Zolna, Ph.D.

New York

The current landscape

Recent US tariff announcements have sent waves of uncertainty across global economies. Unlike past disruptive periods, the current situation is more open-ended and fluid—less an event to manage through and more a new, sustained market dynamic to confront.

Strategies for leaders

Leaders who succeed in this environment seize the opportunity to find advantages—and bring their teams with them. Doing so requires intellectual and emotional resilience, courage, a clear North Star aligned with the organization’s mission, and a commitment to clear communication. They embrace flexibility and are not wedded to their existing playbooks—using what works and adapting or tossing what doesn’t. They know when to dig in and defend a position, but also when to spot and pursue new opportunities quickly and without fear of failure.

Key principles for finding opportunity amid uncertainty

People and purpose

1. Anchor on values and guiding principles: In the race to confront new challenges, many leaders will naturally succumb to the tendency to focus on the urgent over the important. Senior executives play a crucial role in keeping purpose and values at the center. Review major decisions through the lens of organizational purpose and values, conveying clearly defined guiding principles that enable everyone to orient themselves and stay aligned. Your culture is an asset in a volatile world, but it will be put to the test. Role model an unwavering commitment to the firm’s mission, vision, and core values, particularly when facing difficult trade-offs.

2. Avoid communication gaps and enable leaders to lead: Uncertainty causes anxiety, and silence is often seen as bad news. A lack of communication will not be construed as continuity; it will be seen as insularity or indifference. Even if you’re waiting for the dust to settle, it’s important to say so. The best leaders convey a sense of realistic optimism. Equally important, these leaders resist the temptation of reverting to command-and-control styles and empower their own leadership teams to lead.

Agility and long-term strategy

3. Don't toss your playbook but actively seek to evolve it: Relying on the playbook that's historically made you successful could be your undoing. Established patterns may no longer be reliable. Keep your foundation intact and be wary of knee-jerk reactions that threaten long-term strategy, all while remaining intentional about challenging your long-held assumptions. Remember: we often hold on to outdated strategies out of a sense of emotional attachment, rather than rational reasoning.

4. Increase the pace and collaborative intensity of scenario planning: Strategic decrees rarely succeed, and they’re especially unlikely to gain traction in environments characterized by dislocation and change. Accelerate the development of scenarios and make the evaluation of them a collaborative exercise. Defensive measures are essential, but the best leaders also think strategically during times of uncertainty about opportunities to go on the offensive.

Information sources and decision making

5. Increase the frequency and intensity of customer interaction: Organizations tend to retreat internally during moments of change and disruption. The best leaders resist this instinct and push their organizations to engage more widely and deeply with customers. Don’t allow a flurry of internal activity to distract you from your most important source of insight and your best opportunities to create value.

6. Inject productive tension into your decision-making culture: An early test of the quality of your strategic choices will be the vibrancy and intensity of the debate and disagreement that precedes them. Don’t encourage debate for its own sake but be wary of decisions that seem to be made by default. Invest in expanding the variety of your information sources—whether news, data feeds, stakeholders, or advisors. Agree to disagree and commit. Doing so will lead to better choices and a stronger sense of respect and trust across your team.

Authors

Bob Marcus is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in New York.
Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Practice in the Americas. She is based in San Francisco.
Dee Symons is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO practice. She is based in London.
Erin Zolna leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Assessment capability. She is based in New York.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices