Why Engineering Services Firms Need Effective Succession Planning More Than Ever | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why Engineering Services Firms Need Effective Succession Planning More Than Ever

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialIndustrial ServicesC-Suite Succession

Article

Pierre Lefebvre

January 20, 2025

5 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialIndustrial ServicesC-Suite Succession

Executive summary

As many engineering services firms prepare for potential executive turnover, proactive succession planning is key.

Close

Pierre Lefebvre

Montreal

As the availability of engineering services leaders with the right experience disproportionately shrinks, succession planning has become increasingly difficult—and important—within the industry.

To better understand the market dynamics underlying this challenge, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed over 200 executive committee members (ExCo), executive vice presidents (EVPs), and functional leaders within seven of the largest global engineering services firms, which collectively represented over $60 billion in revenue in 2023. Of the executives analyzed, approximately 35% of ExCo members, and 30% of EVPs were estimated to be at least 60 years old in 2024 (Figure 1).

This suggests that turnover within engineering services’ already tight talent landscape could increase within its senior executive ranks. At the same time, the eligible pool of executive talent will continue to shrink. As firms prepare for this, succession planning is key and shortfalls may create or increase strategic risks, amplifying the negative impact of unexpected departures, upending organizational strategy, and resulting in a leadership bench lacking depth and experience.

Figure 1: Proportion (%) of executives at select engineering services firms who are at least 60 years old

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of select engineering services firms’ leadership teams, n=242 executives

Note

EVPs were interpreted as “N-1” senior executives overseeing a market, service, region or corporate function, and are deemed by virtue of their title to have C-suite step-up potential.

Global heads or leads of a market, service or region with SVP titles were taken as EVPs.

Markets: Transportation, Water, Buildings and Places, Energy, etc.

Services: Engineering, Design, Program Management, Construction Management, etc.

Regions: Heads of regions or larger countries, e.g., Americas, EMEA, US, Canada. etc.

Corporate Functions: Communications, strategy, marketing, IT, etc. (For corporate function EVPs, the list is not necessarily representative, as the research was primarily focused on business functions )

Despite the importance of succession planning, construction, engineering and infrastructure leaders lack confidence in their organizations’ approach

When Russell Reynolds Associates asked construction, engineering and infrastructure executives about their organization’s leadership succession practices via our H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, only 39% of these leaders described their organization as being proactive in its succession planning (Figure 2). This highlights a substantial gap in the succession planning diligence of many firms within the sector. As competition for senior executive talent intensifies, a reactive approach to succession planning may result in leadership gaps or hasty hiring decisions which can disrupt operations, hinder strategic continuity and create misalignment between leadership capabilities and evolving market demands.

Figure 2: Succession planning sophistication in construction, engineering & infrastructure

% of leaders answering “Which statement best describes the succession practices for C-suite roles at your organization?”

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 273 construction, engineering and broader infrastructure leaders

And of the C-suite and next generation leaders who had been through a succession experience, only 35% felt the process was transparent (Figure 3). This lack of visibility into succession processes is consequential for managing the risk of next generation leaders, as those who struggle to see a future path in their organization are more likely to seek external opportunities.

Figure 3: Succession practices within construction, engineering & infrastructure

% of leaders answering “Thinking about your most recent succession experience, to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements?” (Among C-level and next gen leaders who have been through a succession process)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 103 construction, engineering and broader infrastructure leaders

Engineering services firms that develop a proactive, robust, and iterative succession plan have a distinct talent—and business—advantage

Proactive engineering services firms are already engaged in several of the following succession strategies.

Internally, they are:

Implementing defensive retention strategies. These strategies can take many forms, such as retention remuneration or career development opportunities, but may not be permanent stand-alone solutions.

Focusing on enabling success (not just selecting successors). By investing in the design of structured executive talent development initiatives, these firms are elevating the managerial and business leadership abilities of promising leaders. This includes assessment, coaching, and rigorous development planning for potential succession candidates.

Ensuring that succession plans are iterative. It is essential for organizations to establish regular rolling reviews to consider developments and new talent, as well as the changing external environment.

Externally, they are:

Analyzing the availability of external talent and benchmarking internal talent against them. This is especially pertinent for firms that don’t have a strong succession bench and are facing pressures to rapidly increase their leadership options.

Considering strong talent from adjacent industries. While unusual for the engineering services industry and complicated by the industry’s lack of proven success in integrating outside talent, this strategy will continue to be relevant.

Developing a pipeline of external prospective candidates and making ongoing introductions, unrelated to an active mandate or urgent succession need. In addition, making sure that the firm's culture is attractive and well-known to external executives.

Quickly assessing senior executives of acquired companies for competencies, fit and potential for leadership roles.

Engineering services firms who adopt these proactive succession strategies will be poised for success, even during periods of increased leadership turnover and intensified competition for talent.

Authors

Pierre Lefebvre leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Engineering & Construction practice. He is based in Montreal.
Shola Brown is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial & Natural Resources Knowledge team. She is based in London.
Jonathan Heng is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial & Natural Resources Knowledge team. He is based in Singapore.

Why Engineering Services Firms Need Effective Succession Planning More Than Ever

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices