RRA AI CEO Lab | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

RRA AI CEO Lab

Russell Reynolds Associates partnered with 100 leading CEOs to explore how leaders can unlock the vast potential of AI.

As pressure builds on the value creation promises with generative Artificial Intelligence, many CEOs find themselves at a crossroads, grappling with a critical question: How do we deliver growth beyond incremental productivity gains?

There is no doubt that the challenges of AI led transformation are complex—from knowing where to start, to addressing skills gaps, and managing ethical concerns. It’s also true that the stakes are high to get it right—and not be left behind.

To navigate a path forward, we brought together RRA experts and 100 high-profile CEOs across a range of industries and geographies who are implementing new approaches with AI across their organizations for our RRA AI CEO Lab roundtable series.

Here we share their invaluable insights and practical lessons on managing this next wave of change, providing you with a roadmap to harness the true power of AI and drive your business forward.

Building on the CEO feedback from the AI roundtable series and the collective input of RRA experts, we have highlighted below practical steps that CEOs can take in 2025 to chart their own paths forward on an accelerated transformation journey.

1. Educate All Employees to Create Foundational AI Literacy, with Cultural Alignment
CEOs must prioritize foundational AI literacy across all levels This includes tailored training for all levels of the organization starting with the CEO, board of directors, and leadership teams.

2. Reimagine the Business with AI’s Transformative Potential in Mind
AI offers an unprecedented opportunity to rethink the very fabric of how organizations operate. Rather than viewing AI as a tool to optimize existing processes—as has been the modus operandi of previous generations of digital innovations—leaders should approach it as a lever for wholesale reinvention. By examining core business workflows through an AI lens, CEOs can identify areas for significant transformation, from supply chain automation and customer experience personalization to new products and services.

3. Engage the Board in Your AI Transformation Journey
The transformative potential of AI necessitates that it become a standing priority in boardroom discussions. Boards play a critical role in balancing long-term transformation with short-term performance. By recruiting “future-focused” board members with strategic insight into technology-driven business evolution, companies can ensure robust oversight without relying solely on technical experts.

4. Act with Urgency by Prioritizing Impactful AI Initiatives and Rapid Experimentation
The pace of AI development requires leaders to act decisively to avoid falling behind. By prioritizing initiatives with clear value creation potential, CEOs can demonstrate early wins that build confidence and momentum across the organization, with special focus on initiatives that directly impact customers, solve pressing business challenges, or tangibly contribute to the organization's strategic goals.

5. Embrace Skunkworks Where Needed to Avoid Traditional Change-Management Resistance
Transformation efforts often face significant resistance due to organizational inertia, skill gaps, fear of disruption, or even just resistance to change. A novel approach emerging from leadership conversations is creating a parallel, AI-enabled replica of a business unit. This method bypasses the lengthy, traditional transformation process by leveraging greenfield tech stacks and outsourced expertise to quickly prototype and deploy automated workflows. CEOs who have embraced this approach report drastically reduced timelines and minimized resistance.

6. Empower Leadership with Adaptable, Cross-Functional Alignment and an Enterprise Mindset
AI transformation demands a new level of collaboration and adaptability from leadership teams. CEOs must align their C-suite to adopt an enterprise-wide perspective, breaking down silos to foster seamless cross-functional collaboration. Leadership skills such as systems thinking, curiosity, and adaptability are essential to navigating the complexities of AI-driven change, as is understanding that learning is a life-long and constant journey. It is also important to create the Future Success Profiles for each business function and to have an assessment framework that can evaluate an executive’s learning agility and future potential in navigating an uncertain future.

7. Build the “AI Factory”
It is important for CEOs to identify the tech and data platforms needed to support their change agenda and to prioritize the upfront investments needed to modernize the business. This includes building new leadership capabilities internally as well as developing the ecosystem of technology infrastructure and application providers in support of the business.

8. Engage Employees Through Early Champions, Pilots, and Showcasing Benefits
Employees are more likely to embrace AI when they see clear, tangible benefits. Early adopters and champions within the organization play a critical role in demonstrating AI’s potential. Leaders should showcase successful pilots and share stories of how AI is improving workflows, productivity, and customer outcomes. This level of encouragement or promotion will engage employees, reduce skepticism, and allow teams to feel empowered rather than threatened by AI.

Insights from our AI CEO Lab Roundtables

Why It Takes a Village to Adopt and Deploy AI

Session 1

Why CEOs Need to Carefully Manage AI Resistance

Session 2

How Healthcare CEOs are Embracing AI

Session 3

How APAC CEOs are Deploying AI

Session 4

How CHROs are Helping Drive AI Transformation

Session 5

How CEOs in Consumer Industries are Adopting AI

Session 6

How Non-Profit CEOs Are Navigating the AI Revolution

Session 7

How CEOs in the Industrial and Natural Resources Industry are Adopting AI

Session 8

How Financial Services CEOs Are Leveraging AI for Strategic Advantage

Session 9

Meet the RRA AI CEO Lab Team

RRA Experts

The CDO
Harpreet Khurana
Russell Reynolds Associates

The Leadership Veteran
Tristan Jervis
Russell Reynolds Associates

The Leadership Veteran
Tuck Rickards
Russell Reynolds Associates

The AI Leadership Veteran
Fawad Bajwa
Russell Reynolds Associates

The CMO
Amy Scissons
Russell Reynolds Associates

BE PART OF THE CONVERSATION

Fill out the form to join us on the Leadership Labs  journey

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices