Session 5: How CHROs are Helping to Transform Their Organizations Through AI | RRA AI CEO Lab | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Session 5: How CHROs are Helping to Transform Their Organizations Through AI

RRA AI CEO Lab

We brought together CHROs from a range of industries, including telecommunications, medical devices, and manufacturing, to hear how their organizations were actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology. Here is what we learned.

Three key takeaways from our conversation with CHROs whose organizations are actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology.

The exponential change curve of AI creates risks of not moving fast enough

Reskilling/upskilling talent is a moral imperative

Organizations need to break the “shame cycle” around AI

Doing nothing, perhaps due to fear of the unknown, is the worst thing to do. The winners will get involved quickly, make mistakes quickly, and learn quickly.”

CHRO attendee
RRA AI CEO Labs

Key lessons from CHROs whose organizations are actively adopting AI

Our attendees shared the opportunities, challenges, and lessons they had faced when implementing AI across their organizations.

Lesson 1: The change curve of AI is now exponential

The group discussed the vast change that AI will bring to organizations—and how it would reimagine business models. CHROs spoke about the velocity of changes that AI is bringing. One shared: “The pace and rate of change has never moved as fast as it is now. The things we discussed 12 months ago are already irrelevant, and the change curve is exponential.” Another added: “AI might have been around for 20 years, but the next generation of this technology is a fundamental shift that will impact our products, the nature of the workforce, and the way we work.”

All attendees focused on the downsizing of mundane or routine tasks, from admin tasks to customer services, to software development, to marketing, with the introduction of Copilot being a fairly ubiquitous starting point. One CHRO pointed to artists and software engineers as the two most disrupted functions, being able to perform their roles significantly faster than before.

With the opportunity that comes from being able to radically re-imagine the organization at scale comes the risks of not keeping pace with competitors. One CHRO shared how AI was “not another fad,” adding that the biggest risk was getting left behind. “AI isn’t a bolt-on. This is changing the business model, breaking the data silos, and rewiring everything … Doing nothing, perhaps due to fear of the unknown, is the worst thing to do. The winners will get involved quickly, make mistakes quickly, and learn quickly.” Another added that accessing talent would be critical to keeping pace. “Without it, we can’t scale or innovate as fast as we want.”

Lesson 2: There is a moral imperative to reskill and upskill talent affected by AI

It was accepted that while every technological revolution has eventually created more jobs than it had axed, AI will radically change the shape of some organizations and talent needs. The group discussed how early AI adoption is often more about augmentation, rather than replacement. “There are plenty of things that AI needs humans for,” one CHRO said. The group discussed how leaders needed to pay constant attention to the experiences of their teams as they interact with AI in their roles, and accept that although productivity may increase, the cognitive load of employees’ remits while leveraging AI won’t necessarily decrease.

However, the group also recognized that AI would inevitably reduce workforces. One CHRO shared: “There will be redundancies due to AI for people at all levels. We have a moral duty and societal responsibility to reskill, upskill, and support people into new careers.”

As part of this conversation, there was a high level of empathy, and a communal agreement that restructured talent should be given every opportunity for agency, support, and reskilling. Some approaches included supporting people into new careers, and supplementary skills training. One CHRO also shared how they had offered voluntary redundancies with 120% severance in an effort to increase empathy around AI transformation.

Lesson 3: Breaking the “shame cycle” around AI understanding

The conversation also touched on the transformation of leadership roles and the necessity of building trust and connectivity within the executive team to facilitate meaningful change. This is about a mindset shift. Tristan Jervis, co-leader of RRA’s Technology Practice, explained that while AI transformation needs to be led by the CEO, CEOs very much still need a cabinet of leaders around them who could help deliver change, at scale, including CHROs. It was discussed how C-suite leaders did not have to become deep experts in AI, but have a level of fluency where they could understand the scale of the opportunity, how and where to deploy AI, and how to enact change management across the organization.

The group discussed how a lack of understanding of AI can cause a "shame cycle" among senior leadership teams. The quickest way to break this is to ensure a fluency in the potential of AI, improve engagement and innovation around AI, and encourage teams to share ideas, experiment together, and fail fast. As Anna Penfold, global leader of RRA's CHRO Practice, explained: "The human element of transformation is so critical. We're seeing the most effective CHROs create psychologically safe environments where leaders can acknowledge knowledge gaps and learn together, encourage experimentation, celebrate learning from failure, and foster cross-functional collaboration. These factors are proving just as valuable as technical expertise in driving meaningful AI adoption."

View the previous session

Back to RRA AI CEO Lab main page

View the next session

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices