Why CHROs Are Playing a More Active Role in CEO Succession | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why CHROs Are Playing a More Active Role in CEO Succession

SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsHuman Resources OfficersCEO Succession

Article

December 13, 2024

11 min

SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsHuman Resources OfficersCEO Succession

Executive Summary

Choosing a CEO is one of the most high-stakes decisions any board will ever make. Here’s why boards are inviting CHROs into the succession process.

Close

Anna Penfold

London

Emma Combe

London

How boards choose their next CEO is evolving. Today, boards are engaging with CEO succession over a longer-term horizon, often four to five years in advance of a transition. During that time, they’re collaborating more deeply with the management team, and in particular, recognizing the value that CHROs can bring to the process.

Boards see the benefits of involving the CHRO, with their people skills and intimate knowledge of the company’s talent pool, not to mention the crucial role they play in broader C-suite succession planning and as a conduit to conversations around the top table. As we explored in our previous work, Cracking The Code on C-Suite Succession: A Roadmap for Chief People Officers, the CHRO is central to building leadership pipelines and ensuring smooth executive transitions.

However, the reality is that many CHROs have never previously been involved in a CEO succession project, despite their experience in C-suite succession. So, how can boards leverage the expertise and perspectives of CHROs to enhance CEO succession processes? And how can they best partner for success?

To answer these questions, we spoke with CHROs across a range of sectors to hear their perspectives on the important role CHROs can play in CEO succession.

Succession planning should be seen as a continuous responsibility, not something reserved for the end of a CEO’s tenure. It’s understandable that new CEOs, eager to make their mark, may delay thinking about their successor. However, effective leadership means integrating succession into the broader strategy from day one. The CHRO and board play a pivotal role in ensuring that this planning is a natural part of the CEO’s role, rather than an afterthought."

Nitin Paranjpe
Former Chief People & Transformation Officer at Unilever

The benefits of involving CHROs in CEO succession projects

Research shows that whether CEO successions succeed or fail isn’t always dependent on obvious hurdles, such as CEO experience. (An analysis of over 1,000 S&P 500 and S&P 400 MidCap CEOs found that length and breadth of executive experience did not predict the post-succession performance of CEOs). Instead, as RRA explored earlier this year, it is the psychological nuances in the process that can often derail even the most mature leaders and organizations.

As the guardians of organizational culture and human capital, CHROs play a pivotal role in navigating these psychological complexities of CEO succession.

01.	An objective sounding board for the CEO

A CHRO is in a good position to persuade a reluctant or unwilling CEO to start thinking about succession planning sooner than they otherwise would. The CHRO can be their confidant or sounding board, giving them the opportunity to speak openly and honestly about their long-term plans, aspirations and potential exit strategy. The CHRO can also help the CEO to understand that choosing a successor is a core part of the job, and a key marker of their success and their long-term legacy as a leader. As Brigid Pelino, Chief People and Culture Officer at Definity, told us: “As a CHRO, you handle some of the most sensitive conversations with the CEO, which naturally places you in a position of trust. You become the central point for gathering and sharing insights from peers, consolidating their concerns, successes, and overall sentiment. The key is to have clear, direct conversations with the CEO, ensuring they’re always informed about what they truly need to know.” From this objective position, CHROs can play a role in CEO succession that is harder for board members to do.

02. Expert insights into the internal talent pool

The CHRO has a unique vantage point of the organization’s talent pool, from the rising stars to the unsung heroes and at all levels via the talent ecosystem, and they can bring these perspectives to board-level discussions. Armed with insights from either first-hand experience or from external advisors, they know much about internal candidates: their strengths, their blind spots, their leadership skills, their readiness for the top job. Expert assessment data and analysis helps the board to form a rounded, accurate view of the potential internal frontrunners, with many CHROs attributing the success of the entire process to the robust underpinning it provides. “As a CHRO, you have a unique advantage through your deep knowledge of internal candidates and your trusted relationship with the CEO,” said Ally Dashner, Vice President & Head of People at Delfi Diagnostics. “The key to influencing the process is asking powerful questions and coaching your main stakeholders, while ensuring you maintain an appropriate balance in those relationships. When disagreements arise, it's about bringing people together to find a resolution that serves the organization’s long-term interests."

03.	A bridge between the board and CEO

The fact that the CHRO does not often sit on the board in most major markets means they can remain a neutral party, acting as a bridge between the board and the current CEO throughout the process—keeping the lines of communication open, relaying important information back and forth, and managing expectations on both sides. As Chris Van Steenbergen, the former Chief Human Resources Officer at Heineken, told us: “As a CHRO, maintaining neutrality is all about earning and sustaining trust from both the board and the CEO. The board needs to have full confidence that you’ll act in the best interest of the organization, not just for the CEO or the next candidate. Your role is to be transparent and truthful, which is only possible when that trust is firmly in place."

04.	Smoothing the way during a CEO transition

In much the same way, the CHRO can also be a bridge between the incoming and outgoing CEO. They are in a unique position to be a sounding board for both sides, giving each one the opportunity to speak freely about their own plans, hopes, and fears. Armed with these insights, the CHRO can then use what they’ve learned to help both sides to find common ground and constructive solutions to any differences they may have. And they can also help to make sure that the outgoing CEO doesn’t stand in the way of their successor during the transition period by trying to stop them doing things their own way or taking the business in new directions. All this, of course, reduces the potential for conflicts which may otherwise take up the board’s valuable time and energy.

As a CHRO, resolving conflicts starts with listening and creating space for the CEO, board, and key stakeholders to share their concerns. One-on-one conversations help uncover different perspectives and build common ground. Stay engaged, remain neutral, and filter out the politics to ensure all parties feel heard and respected, guiding them toward constructive solutions."

Joel Gray
Senior Vice President, Human Resources, Westlake

How boards and CHROs can partner for success

It takes a skilled CHRO to do right by the board, the business, and both the outgoing and incoming CEOs while protecting their own reputation. We’ve identified six ways boards and CHROs can partner to create value in CEO succession processes.

01.	Work with CHROs to build strong, trust-based relationships throughout the succession process

Building trust between the board, the CEO, and other key leaders is essential to a successful succession process. CHROs should see their role as fostering open communication and acting as a bridge between different stakeholders. Boards should see the CHRO as a channel for mediating conflict, gaining candid feedback, and a useful check on ensuring decisions are aligned with the organization’s best interests. The ability to build trusting relationships directly influences a CHRO’s ability to navigate the complexities and overall process of succession planning. As one CHRO told us: "Success comes from mastering the people dynamics, guiding the CEO to leverage the best practices already in place, and maintaining strong communication with the board. When trust is built on both sides, the succession process becomes an opportunity for growth across the leadership team and the organization."

02.	Start the process early and plan ahead to ensure a smooth transition

Planning is everything—in fact, many CHROs mentioned that if the CEO succession planning process is properly executed, one should have a contingency plan for any disruption that may arise. And the process does not stop with an appointment—a plan for CEO onboarding can help smooth the transition and minimize disruption to the business. Boards can lean on CHROs to develop and execute the plan end-to-end, providing continuity and transparency throughout the process. As Katy Theroux, former Chief Human Resources Officer at Cornerstone Building Brands, told us: “Starting the discussion well before the anticipated change allows you to define your role as CHRO in the succession process, identify candidates, and build a strong plan.  Regular check-ins with the CEO, board, and leadership team ensure alignment, and a phased, transparent approach to onboarding sets expectations for all constituents.”

03.	Adopt a data-driven approach

A CHRO can bring valuable experience in working with external providers of assessment data and tools to ensure a transparent and fair CEO succession process. A CHRO will have expertise in leveraging  performance metrics, archetypes, leadership and psychological assessments, and external benchmarks to evaluate potential succession candidates—both internally and externally—which can help boards to reach better decisions about each person’s suitability to the organization’s needs. By leveraging data as the driving force in the decision-making process, a CHRO will effectively reduce any biases that may arise for preferred candidates, align stakeholders, and provide evidence-based recommendations. Several CHROs have noted that leveraging external providers for assessment data and criteria benchmarking was a pivotal moment, realigning stakeholders and allowing the process to move forward with stronger momentum. Boards should therefore lean on their CHROs to bring their expertise to the table to help them build consensus and make the best decisions for their business more quickly than they otherwise might have done.

Assessment data is incredibly powerful in the succession process. It’s invaluable when you need to confirm a candidate’s potential or highlight hidden talent within the organization. They provide the board and leadership team with objective insights, helping align decisions with data rather than assumptions."

Soni Basi
Former Global Chief People Officer, Edelman

04.	Be explicit that the CHRO’s role is to establish and maintain independence

To add value as the  connective tissue that binds all stakeholders in the succession process, it is critical for the CHRO to develop and maintain independence. While being a trusted advisor to the CEO and board, the CHRO needs to maintain a neutral stance, prioritizing the organization’s long-term success over individual loyalties. But, given the personal vulnerability of the CHRO in CEO succession, this is harder than it sounds.  "Maintaining independence as a CHRO is super important and takes courage,” Ronald Schellekens, Chief Human Resources Officer, Unilever, Ice Cream told us. “It’s important for the CHRO to challenge CEOs and other executive team colleagues, not for the sake of conflict, but to ensure that necessary disagreements are openly discussed and resolved. Independent thinking means addressing tough issues head-on and making sure leadership hears what they need to, not just what they want to. The CHRO must set the standard that these conversations aren’t personal—it’s about staying true to principles, even when it’s uncomfortable, and that’s what ultimately leads to the strongest outcomes.”

05.	Entrust CHROs with facilitating transparent, ongoing, and tactical communication

Open communication throughout the CEO succession process is key to maintaining alignment and trust. While openness and transparency are important, understanding what to share and with who at any given moment is an equally essential skill to possess. The CHRO should ensure that all stakeholders are kept informed about the progress, challenges, and any changes to the succession plan. Regular updates to the board, the CEO, and other senior leaders help manage expectations and reduce uncertainty. "Open, ongoing communication is essential during CEO succession but knowing what to share and when is just as important,” Andrew Biga, Chief People Officer at Go Health, told us. “Building close relationships with both the CEO and the board allows you to gather critical insights and ensure proper alignment throughout the process. Having direct communication with board members gives you the ability to address concerns in real time and provide clarity where needed. This transparency keeps everyone on the same page and helps manage expectations.” Partnering with an emotionally intelligent CHRO can add value to CEO succession processes by helping all parties feel informed, secure, and aligned throughout the process.

06.	Seek out CHROs with a learning and adaptive mindset

A well-thought-out succession plan requires adaptability. To be successful, a it is important a CHRO remains flexible and open to learning as the process and its stakeholders evolve, reflecting on the lessons learned and adjusting strategies based on feedback ensures continuous improvement. Eric Barger, Managing Director, Bolton Talent, describes this mindset as “Know, grow, flow.” He explained: “Know your talent deeply—understand who they are and what they need. From there, you can grow your pipeline by investing in development, ensuring your people have the right opportunities. As you flow talent across teams and regions, you continuously retrace back to the 'Know' facet, developing new benchmarks and understanding, which keeps the process adaptive and aligned with evolving organizational needs." Boards should therefore look for CHROs that embody this mindset to ensure they have the capabilities to add substantive value during the complex and fluid process of selecting a new CEO.

Authors

Emma Combe is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO practice. She is based in London.
Anna Penfold leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers capability. She is based in London.
Alison Huntington leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers and Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers capabilities. She is based in London.
Jason Kipkala is the Commercial Operations Leader for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers and Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers capabilities. He is based in Toronto.

Why CHROs Are Playing a More Active Role in CEO Succession

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices