The Key to Family Enterprise Success: Don’t Leave Leadership Development to Chance | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Key to Family Enterprise Success: Don’t Leave Leadership Development to Chance

Family EnterpriseAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

Michelle Mion

January 22, 2025

7 min

Family EnterpriseAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Continuous leadership development is critical in family enterprises. We explore how to identify future leaders and how to set them up for success.

Close

Michelle Mion

Milan

Leaders aren't born, they are made."

— Vince Lombardi

You will know all too well that leading a family enterprise is more than preserving what you've built—it's about continuously looking forward and planning for the future. It’s about intentionally cultivating the next generation of family leadership, whether family members or non-family leaders, that will propel your business to succeed across generations.

However, many family enterprises often overlook the need for continuous leadership development. They believe that the next generation of leaders will emerge from the pack and make themselves known. When this doesn’t happen, and family enterprises begin to identify and prepare next-generation talent for more senior positions, they often find it takes far longer and requires more effort than they initially thought.

In starting the process too late, the business faces two risks: one, the future stability of the organization is undermined; two, high-potential leaders may slip through the cracks. In our research, for example, we found that 71% of leaders in family enterprises globally say they are likely to consider moving organizations, with 36% citing career advancement as their primary motivation. In other words, your most talented leaders might be walking out the door because they don't see a clear path to growth.

Based on our experience advising family enterprises globally, we explore how family enterprises can identify future family leaders and non-family leaders who have the potential to move through the ranks, and how you can develop these leaders to give them the best possible chance to succeed.

Hear Michelle Mion, a family enterprise advisor at RRA, discuss how to best nurture future family leadership in your organization.

Align family stakeholders on the candidate Success Profile

The first step is for family stakeholders to agree on what good looks like for the next generation of leaders at the enterprise. Gaining alignment is not always easy—and requires time. But when stakeholders collectively define a clear Success Profile, they mitigate potential conflicts, reduce bias, and create a more robust framework for leadership development. The process requires stakeholders to be open and transparent about the leadership qualities and technical skills they’re looking for.

It's important to avoid the trap of creating carbon copies of the leaders you have today. Instead, the goal is to think about where your organization will be 5, 10, or 15 years down the road—and develop a Success Profile based on that strategic journey. It's also good practice to outline the culture and values that a leader will need to embody to secure the enterprise's legacy.

The world is changing fast—and there is no doubt that leadership needs to change with it. For this reason, it helps to ensure your Success Profile reflects the future needs of your organization, not today’s.

Assess for potential, not just experience

Another trap some family enterprises fall into is overlooking the importance of systemic talent development, which leads to the risk of letting promising leaders go unnoticed and undeveloped.

The reality is that leadership isn't about a predetermined set of traits you’re born with. It's about systematic development and opportunity. For this reason, try to avoid making leadership development decisions solely on existing experience or current competencies, and instead aim to look at the potential of leaders to evolve, and embark on a continuous learning journey. This is only becoming more important given the volatile and complex world that family enterprises operate in today.

At RRA, our Leadership Portrait approach allows us to understand the specific traits that determine whether someone is likely to thrive in a leadership role. And the good news? All can be developed, with the right interventions at the right time.

Curiosity and adaptability: Leaders who exhibit this trait understand the need to foster a mindset of continuous learning. They can balance the tension between preservation and progress, are inquisitive, and are open to fresh ideas and new ways of thinking.

Drive and resilience: When under pressure from every corner, resilient leaders rally their organization and inspire confidence that they have what it takes to lead the family enterprise through hard times and come out stronger on the other side. They are motivated to overcome challenges and push beyond comfort zones.

Social intelligence: Leaders who exhibit this trait can actively listen, read a room, and navigate the intricate interpersonal dynamics and relationships in a family enterprise. They can also flex their communication style based on who they are speaking to.

Systems thinking: Leaders who possess this skill can synthesize a vast amount of information, connect seemingly disparate dots, and make informed decisions. They understand the web of complex relationships that define their family enterprise and can bring different stakeholders along on the journey.

How to assess leadership potential

Identifying capable leaders is only half the battle. The real challenge lies in ensuring these leaders will go on to succeed in the role and deliver sustained success in the face of unprecedented volatility and complexity.

So, how do you know if a senior leader at your family enterprise has true staying power and can translate their impressive experience into long-lasting success once in the role? Based on our research, we have identified three core capabilities that successful leaders possess.

Self-knowledge: Leaders are not only aware of their strengths and what they can bring to the table, but they're also aware of their derailers, and what conditions bring these to the surface.

Value-driven: Leaders have a strong values system that serves as the cornerstone of their decision-making processes. They assess difficult choices against their principles, which can provide clarity on how to best proceed.

Legacy-driven: Leaders offer a well-articulated view of their professional purpose and desired impact on the wider ecosystem. They are cognizant of the long-term impact of their leadership and can articulate the steps they are taking to shape their legacy.

To assess leadership potential, it’s helpful to create rigorous assessment processes that go beyond traditional performance reviews—and remain open to surprising candidates who might not fit initial expectations.

How to supercharge next-generation leadership development

Invest in external coaching and mentoring

Family dynamics can complicate internal mentorship. That's why we recommend seeking independent mentors and coaches who can provide objective guidance. These external perspectives can develop family members' skills, experience, and confidence without the emotional baggage of family relationships.

Give insiders an outsider's perspective

While tempting, you don’t always need to look externally to get fresh perspectives. You can also nurture critical thinking and alternative points of view within the enterprise, for example, by exposing family members to different companies in the portfolio, external work experiences, or exposure to other family executives. The goal is to provide plenty of opportunities for increasing autonomy and responsibility. It helps to let future leaders see all aspects of business operations and decision-making to build a well-rounded skill set.

Look beyond the next generation

It's important to avoid only focusing on immediate successors. Imagine how talent might fit into the enterprise as it evolves and aim to build a strong leadership pipeline that starts early and leaves no gaps. This approach builds organizational resilience—and ensures the business is not caught off guard by unexpected leadership departures.

Where next?

It's important to remember that the enterprise is not just filling a role. It's securing its future. The leaders that are developed today will determine the business's trajectory for decades to come. So, try to avoid seeing leadership as a birthright or a predetermined path. Leadership is developed, nurtured, and carefully cultivated.

The enterprise's most valuable asset isn't its current balance sheet—it's the potential of the people who will write the next chapter. And that means embarking on a continuous journey of leadership development. Assess, develop, and believe in the leaders the business can create.

Authors

Diego Esteban

Michelle Mion

Family Enterprise Insights

Article

Featured
7 min read

CEO Succession in Family Enterprises: Don’t Wait for the Night Before Noon

Family EnterpriseCEO Succession

Article

Featured
7 min read

How Can Family Enterprises Integrate External CEOs While Preserving Their Culture?

Family EnterpriseExecutive SearchCulture Analytics

Article

Featured
7 min read

How Can You Effectively Manage Underperforming Leaders in Family Enterprises?

Family EnterpriseAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

Featured
7 min read

The Tradition Trap: How Family Enterprises Can Balance Legacy and Innovation

Technology and InnovationSustainable LeadershipTransformation and InnovationFamily Enterprise

Article

Featured
7 min read

When’s The Right Time For Family Enterprise Boards to Appoint Independent Directors?

Family EnterpriseBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

View All

CONNECT WITH OUR FAMILY ENTERPRISE TEAM

Speak to a consultant

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices