The Three Conditions That Matter Most for Transformation | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Three Conditions That Matter Most for Transformation

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationCulture Analytics

Article

May 18, 2026

6 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationCulture Analytics

Executive summary

Even the most thoughtfully designed transformation will stall if the right conditions for change aren’t in place.

Close

Bob Marcus

New York

Sean Dineen

Boston

Most transformations don’t fail because of poor strategy. They fail because the organization isn’t set up to change.

Leaders often focus on refining strategy, restructuring teams, and launching new initiatives. But even the most well-designed plans stall when the underlying conditions for change aren’t in place.

Our research shows that transformation success depends less on leaders’ plans, and more on whether they genuinely believe in the change. This aligns with our experience working with clients, where this gap is often rooted in a disconnect in belief. While many leaders understand the need for change, fewer are deeply convinced or able to instill that conviction across the organization, or actively create the conditions that allow change to take hold.

79%

of leaders believe transformation is critical for their organizations long-term growth and stability

Russell Reynolds Associates’ Transformational Leadership Study reveals that only about one in three (29%) of leaders believe their organization has been extremely or very successful in their transformation efforts, despite a large majority (79%) of leaders agreeing that transformation is extremely or very critical to their organizations long-term growth and stability.

So why is success so elusive?

Perhaps one of the biggest barriers is organizational inertia. As leaders, you know better than anyone that changing the status quo—even within small portions of the business—is extremely hard. Yet, even when the right systems of transformation are in place, deeply ingrained ways of working can derail the most thoughtfully designed transformations. That’s why creating the conditions for change is such an important leadership responsibility.

Methodology

Drawing from dozens of interviews with CEOs and using survey data from our 2025 Transformational Leadership Survey with over 1,000 executives—CEOs, C-suite leaders, and next-generation leaders (one to two levels below the C-suite)—we identified 27 organizational dimensions spanning culture, talent, structure, hierarchy, and communication that influence transformation outcomes.

Next, via our survey, we gathered data on how leaders scored their organizations on these dimensions. Using a factor analysis—a common statistical technique for detecting common themes within data—we isolated eight distinct factors, or conditions for change.

We then conducted a relative importance analysis to link these conditions for change to transformation outcomes. Transformation outcomes were determined by leaders’ rating of their organization’s transformation efforts on a 5-point scale from ‘not at all successful’ to ‘extremely successful.’

Methodology

The three conditions that drive transformation success

By linking the conditions for change to transformation’s outcomes, a clear pattern emerged. While all eight factors play important roles, three consistently have a disproportionate impact on success. Together, they account for more than half (56%) of the difference between transformations that stall and those that deliver lasting results.

Figure 1: The eight organizational conditions needed for transformation—and the three that stand above the rest

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates 2025 Transformational Leadership Survey

Condition #1: Change-ready culture

Change-ready culture rises above the other factors we measured, displaying the most influence over transformation success. This is not about waiting for change to happen; rather, it is about maintaining a constant state of readiness, being adaptive, and driving continuous evolution.We define culture as the values and behaviors that shape how work gets done. In this context, a change-ready culture encourages individuals to challenge long-held assumptions, to rethink established processes, and to experiment without fear of negative consequences. A change-ready culture should foster continuous learning and improvement, even when familiar ways of working feel safer or more efficient. Questioning the status quo is not disruptive; it is expected.In our interviews with CEOs who have led successful transformations, they describe culture as a direct function of the leadership team and their behaviors. It begins with clearly articulated values around innovation, experimentation, and curiosity. Moreover, those values need to bleed throughout the organization. Developing a change-ready culture requires leaders (especially the CEO) to humbly model these values, setting aside ego and remaining open to learning.Practically, this means transformation is not just a top-down directive, but a shared organizational responsibility. Leaders must position it as an opportunity, not merely an initiative, and empower teams to take ownership rather than wait for instruction. This also means giving your teams space for creative risk-taking and room to fail.While it is one of the most important conditions for successful transformation, it is also one of the most difficult to get right. On average, the leaders we surveyed rated their organizations’ ability to drive a change-ready culture as a relative weakness.

Condition #2: High impact talent

High impact talent is the second most influential factor over transformation success. It highlights the importance of placing the right individuals in the right roles to drive transformation forward.High impact talent includes employees who are highly motivated by the organization’s mission, who believe in their ability to make a meaningful impact on the organization’s goals, and who bring (or can develop) the right skills for future success. This requires evaluating current leaders—from the C-suite team to those executing day-to-day priorities—and investing in development when there are transformation capability gaps.The CEOs we interviewed emphasized the importance of reskilling their workforce—whether that meant building fluency in new technologies or evolving commercial capabilities. But reskilling is not simply a training program. Leaders must create an environment where their teams embrace ambiguity, challenge historic ways of working, and focus on continuous learning.At the same time, several CEOs acknowledged that reskilling alone is not always enough. In some cases, transformation requires difficult decisions around leadership team structure and composition. It can mean reshaping the top team, replacing leaders who are misaligned with the future direction of the organization, and bringing in individuals who offer critical experience or new perspectives. For many of these CEOs, these early decisions set the tone for the rest of their transformation journeys.

“You need to combine people who have been at the organization for many years and understand there’s no alternative but to move in this new direction with people who understand the new world you’re heading into. That’s why we brought in talent from the cloud, cybersecurity, and internet of things sectors and put them together.”
José María Álvarez-Pallete López
Former CEO and Chair of Telefónica S.A

Condition #3: Goal and role clarity

Goal and role clarity consists of establishing clear performance metrics, well-defined roles and responsibilities, and a shared understanding of the organization’s direction among the executive team. It converts belief in the transformation into coordinated action.In our experience working with clients, many organizations are still running transformations on legacy operating models built for incremental change. This limits their ability to move quickly, remove barriers, and continuously reprioritize as conditions evolve. Increasingly, leaders need to shift towards more dynamic operating cadences, with faster decision-making, greater cross-enterprise alignment, and more frequent reassessment of priorities.To do this, the CEOs we interviewed described a range of clarity-building tactics, particularly among the senior leadership team. Many emphasized the importance of ensuring every leader fully understood the “why” behind the need for change. In practice, this took different forms: regular discussions about market dynamics and the evolving competitive landscape; structured leadership development programs; or deliberate encouragement of constructive debate. One CEO described intentionally sharing a bold perspective to spark open dialogue and test assumptions. These efforts deepen a leadership team’s understanding of challenges and opportunities—and help develop alignment around priorities.While creating alignment and clarity may seem straightforward, overlooking this critical condition can quickly derail transformation efforts. True transformation cannot take hold without a shared and deeply felt understanding of the need for change.

“I would thank people for disagreeing and debating in the executive team in private. But once we made a decision, whether it was unanimous or not, everyone left that room with a united voice about the decisions we made.”
James Hackett
Former CEO of Anadarko Petroleum

Figure 2: Relative impact of factors on transformation success

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates 2025 Transformational Leadership Survey | Among CEOs, C-level leaders, and next-gen leaders (n=1,245) | Note: This analysis shows which factors are most influential relative to others. Lower-ranked items may still matter—they simply exert less relative impact in this context.

How do successful leadership teams create the conditions for change?

Our interviews with current and former CEOs who have led successful transformations revealed a range of tactics, but also saw a set of common principles and practices emerged that underpinned the objectives of those tactics:

Relentless communication of vision and purpose

Transformation requires clarity. Leaders must continuously articulate and reinforce the “why” behind the change to inspire at every level. The CEOs we interviewed achieved this through consistent storytelling that brought the change to life, regular leadership touchpoints and town halls that maintained alignment, and structured learning opportunities that deepened understanding of why change is necessary.

Change one chapter at a time

Our interviewees emphasized that effective transformation must be broken down into manageable phases. This requires setting near-term goals that clearly connect to the long-term vision, designing processes that are both sustainable and engaging, and fostering a culture of discovery in which progress is deliberately recognized and celebrated.

Align incentives to enterprise outcomes

In our interviews, CEOs consistently pointed to incentives as a critical lever for driving behavior change. It reinforces the behaviors you want to see by anchoring everyone around clear metrics that keep focus sharp and teams moving in the same direction. This often involves evolving compensation, KPIs, and recognition systems that reinforce collective (rather than siloed) success.

Model the behaviors you want

Leaders ultimately set the tone for behaviors that cascade throughout the rest of the organizations. In our interviews, CEOs highlighted the importance of consistently demonstrating the values and expectations they seek to embed. This includes building trust through transparency and vulnerability, maintaining a learning orientation, and giving deliberate attention to the interpersonal, or “softer,” dimensions of leadership.

Understand and actively manage culture

The CEOs we interviewed were clear: culture does not create itself. It requires deliberate structure and attention. In practice, leaders pointed to several approaches, including defining a culture score that tracks progress, engaging experts, such as psychologists, to conduct confidential interviews and maintaining an open dialogue with employees through forums like focus groups and informal check-ins.

Unlock the power of many

Finally, CEOs emphasized that transformation succeeds when ownership extends beyond the executive team. This involves ensuring the right individuals, not just the executive team, are leading critical initiatives, maintaining regular executive meetings or informal check-ins, and reassessing priorities with progress and changing conditions.

Key Takeaways

Transformation success depends on leadership creating the right conditions, not just strategy
Even well-designed transformation plans fail when organizations lack the underlying readiness and belief needed to support change.

A change-ready culture is the strongest driver of success

Organizations that encourage experimentation, continuous learning, and challenging the status quo are far more likely to sustain transformation.

High-impact talent accelerates progress

Having the right people in the right roles—along with a focus on reskilling and, when necessary, reshaping leadership teams—is critical to moving transformation forward.

Clarity turns intent into action

Clear goals, defined roles, and a shared understanding of the “why” enable faster decision-making, alignment, and execution across the organization.

Leadership behavior sets the foundation for change

Successful transformations are driven by leaders who communicate consistently, align incentives, model desired behaviors, and actively shape culture across the business.

Authors

Ela Buczynska is a member of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.
Bob Marcus is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in New York.
Sean Dineen is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in Boston.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices