How Can Family Enterprises Integrate External CEOs While Preserving Their Culture? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Family Enterprise Slides

Family Enterprises: Preserving Culture

The Culture Conundrum
How to Preserve an Organization’s Culture
How to Embed an Outside CEO
More Family Enterprise Insights
Meet the Team

The Culture Conundrum

How Can Family Enterprises Integrate External CEOs While Preserving Their Culture?

scroll
BACK TO TOP

Culture eats strategy for breakfast.
- Peter Drucker

To be clear, we’ve got nothing against strategy. It’s critical to have direction and have a plan for getting there. But, in a family enterprise, culture and values are key.
Your values and culture are the core of who you are as an organization. They are your uniqueness. Your identity. And what inspires your people and drives your success.
Many family enterprises are concerned about hiring an external CEO, believing they’ll erode the cultural foundations of the organization and compromise family legacy.
But with a strategic approach to the CEO selection process, you can balance preservation and necessary transformation.
This starts well before an external CEO is hired. At the core of the search and selection process, it’s important to align on values, styles, and more importantly the definition of rules, channels of communication, and governance. Once the CEO is hired, you can then focus on setting them up for success with a solid transition process.

How to Preserve an Organization’s Culture

So, when hiring a new CEO, what transition actions can a family enterprise take to preserve the organization’s cultural identity?

1

Document your organization’s past
First, a clear understanding and crystallization of your values as an organization is key. Set out the founding story and principles that have guided the business over time. This will help to cement the organization’s identity.

2

Immerse the new CEO in your history
Next, thoughtfully onboard the new leader by immersing them in the organization’s family history, values, and guiding principles. This will help the new CEO understand and embrace the unique identify of your organization—and the core of what has made it successful.

3

Help the new CEO understand family dynamics
Ensure the new CEO spends time building effective relationships with the key leaders in the firm. It’s important that they begin to build trust and alignment as early as possible—without this, it will be impossible for those leaders to thrive.

How to Embed an Outside CEO

Hear Paco Ruiz Maza, a family enterprise advisor at RRA, discuss how family enterprises can best integrate external CEOs.

It’s not an easy job to do. But striking the balance between preserving your cultural identity, while remaining open to change, is critical to ensuring enduring success.

More Family Enterprise Insights

Explore our insights about how family enterprises  can thrive in a fast-changing world, from succession planning and leadership development, to managing underperforming leaders and driving transformation.

Succession
CEO Succession in Family Enterprises: Don’t Wait for the Night Before Noon

DEVELOPMENT
The Key to Family Enterprise Success: Don’t Leave Leadership Development to Chance

LEADERSHIP
How Can You Effectively Manage Underperforming Leaders in Family Enterprises?

Meet the RRA Generation team

Led by Justus O’Brien, our global family enterprise advisory practice brings decades of experience working with family enterprises globally, whatever stage of their journey. We recognize that family enterprises represent something extraordinary—where legacy meets innovation, family meets business, and shared values create powerful business advantages. Our commitment extends beyond traditional consulting—we build enduring relationships to become trusted partners in family enterprises for generations to come.

Connect with Our Team

Connect with Our Team

Connect with our team to learn how we can help you empower your family enterprises to innovate, adapt and thrive across generations.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices