Culture Makers and Risk Takers: The Evolving CPG CEO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Culture Makers and Risk Takers: The Evolving CPG CEO

Industry TrendsSuccessionConsumerConsumer ProductsBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Article

January 31, 2025

11 min

Industry TrendsSuccessionConsumerConsumer ProductsBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

As change keeps accelerating, we’ve observed that CPG CEOs who can flex among five leadership personas are most likely to succeed.

Close

Dick Patton

Boston

Andrew Hayes

Houston
New York

From 1980 to 2012, the consumer packaged goods (CPG) industry followed a set playbook: building compelling brands, expanding with growing markets and channels, and managing costs to generate more brand-building capital. This approach delivered consistently high-performance and reliable top-line growth. But as population growth slowed, grocers consolidated, and consumer attention and preferences fragmented in the early 2010s, the industry could no longer rely on this strategy.1

In the years following the pandemic, a series of disruptions—including supply chain challenges, morphing shopping habits, price increases, geopolitical uncertainty, inflationary pressures and climate change—led to stagnating returns. As a result, CPG CEOs were forced into a constantly reactive mindset.

Then, in 2024, industry changes that had been percolating for several years suddenly accelerated. Shifts in consumer behaviors, an evolving relationship between CPG and retail organizations, volume recovery imperatives, rising interest in private label, and continuous digital and ecommerce evolution all highlighted that reactive leadership approaches are no longer sufficient. Instead, CPG CEOs need adaptive thinking, opportunity-focus, and predictive mindsets.

To help CPG organizations better understand how these shifts are reshaping the industry landscape, as well as how their CEOs need to respond, Russell Reynolds Associates gathered insights from our CPG experts across the globe, identifying the leadership personas necessary for CPG CEO success in 2025 and beyond.

What does the current CPG environment look like?

Shift in consumers behaviors

In recent years, consumers have grown accustomed to relentless uncertainty, including high inflation and rising prices, making them far more adaptive to change. They are increasingly open to new products and services, as they seek more value to make the most of what they are purchasing. While consumers are trading down on some items, they’re also selectively willing to pay more for higher-quality “premiumization” products.

Changing relationship between CPG and retail

Retailers are exercising their leverage over CPG organizations by cutting prices, investing in private label, demanding more supply chain excellence and reducing the commercial teams that collaborate with CPGs.2  As the lines between retail and CPG blur, relationships have become understandably unsettled, with each taking on parts of the other’s traditional role.

Volume recovery

Raw material and production costs rose substantially between 2021 and 2023. In response, manufacturers passed these costs on to consumers in multiple rounds of price increases, which led to significant revenue growth. However, this lowered overall volume sales, as consumers reduced their spending due to the high inflationary environment. As CPGs are unable to continue to increase prices, they can no longer price themselves to hit their performance plans. Therefore, driving revenue growth through unit growth has been both a top priority and a challenge for many CPG organizations.

Rise of private label

Private label has been on the rise for several years, accounting for an estimated 25% of sales in Europe and 14% in the US today.3  As consumers adopt value-seeking behaviors, including switching to private label as a more affordable alternative, they have discovered a significant quality improvement and are now less willing to switch back to branded goods.

Digital acceleration

Digital transformation remains enormously important within the CPG industry. Ecommerce sales have continued to increase across CPG categories post-pandemic, with consumers increasingly making online purchases for their groceries, beauty, personal care, and household items. CPG organizations are also leveraging direct-to-consumer and partnerships with ecommerce platforms like Amazon, Walmart, and other ecommerce-focused retailers. Finally, CPG organizations are leveraging their digital capabilities for supply chain optimization, revenue growth management solutions, personalization and customization via customer data, and more.

What are CPG organizations doing in response?

Portfolio reshaping

As CPG organizations seek growth and shift to being proactive in their strategy, they’re reshaping their portfolios with an emphasis on promising categories and geographies. Reckitt Benckiser announced its intentions to reshape its brand portfolio, prioritizing its market-leading, higher growth and margin brands, allowing them to shift to a more efficient model.4  Many organizations are using portfolio reshaping as a tool to simplify their businesses and focus on who they feel they are at their core (e.g., Unilever spun off its ice cream business, General Mills sold its yogurt business, the Campbell Soup Company rebranded to The Campbell’s  Company).

Brand consolidation

CPG companies have historically leveraged mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures to generate growth via portfolio changes. The industry experienced many brand divestitures over the last few years; however, now with interest rates declining and regulations expected to relax, we are starting to see more brand consolidation (e.g., Mars acquired Kellanova). Looking forward, successful CPG organizations will likely take a hybrid approach to M&A, including large portfolio consolidation acquisitions and investments in small, high-growth companies.5

Consumer-centricity

Consumer-centricity has always been a CPG operating tenet; however, over the past few years, CPGs were focused on commercial execution over consumer connection. Going forward, there is strong interest in reestablishing relationships with consumers, understanding their motives and desires, and developing growth strategies based on their behaviors.

Innovation, branding & marketing

CPG leaders are emphasizing innovation that will lead to differential growth, while also reverting back to traditional marketing approaches to help drive consumers to stores. “Flavor flankers” and other incremental innovations will continue to serve a purpose, but companies (and consumers) are seeking more transformational offerings to influence purchase decisions and address changing consumer needs. Similarly, organizations must also be willing to revolutionize their marketing practices. This could be in the form of leveraging AI to access proprietary insights, accelerating brand innovation, adapting creative content, and optimizing media campaigns and spend.

Relationships with customers

CPG organizations understand that strong strategic partnerships with retailers ultimately rely on deep category insights. Commercial excellence is critical to maintaining their relationships with retailers, including implementing digitally-enabled revenue growth management solutions, among others.

Leveraging digital & AI

CPG companies are using technology to modernize the traditional levers they use to drive growth and win back consumers. To set up the right AI infrastructure, many CPG organizations are prioritizing data and analytics, creating internal teams dedicated to ecommerce, metaverse, innovation, and customer experience—all of which leverage data from internal sources like CRM, credit card, and digital transactions. CPG companies also continue digitizing supply chains in anticipation of future disruptions and to handle demand influxes from increased promotional activity.

Building cultural agility

Over the last few years, CEOs of CPGs have increasingly invested in their organization’s culture, understanding that it can be a competitive advantage. However, being sensitive to existing culture strengths is just as critical as making adjustments to it. Creating cultural agility allows an organization to modify approaches, adjust practices and shift strategies to address changing needs, without destabilizing the organization. Culture is the fuel that allows CPG organizations to adapt to the changes happening around them. If CEOs can build a culture that embraces continuous improvement, adaptability and change, then the entire organization can move in harmony during change.

What does this mean for CPG CEOs?

These new industry currents have caused shifts beneath the surface that are fundamentally changing CPG CEO leadership. The rate of change will continue to accelerate, making leadership contexts more complex and unpredictable. How CPG boards identify, develop, and select the right executives for CEO leadership, and how they create the conditions for them to succeed, has never been more nuanced.

To help boards understand the best predictors of success among leadership teams within the overall changing business context, RRA developed Leadership Portrait.

Built upon years of proprietary research, this model assesses an executive’s readiness to meet immediate challenges, as well as their future potential to continue to learn and grow in the face of change. Our new approach helps boards identify CEOs with the agility to stay in front of the change curve, the self-possession to accelerate their own learning in the face of uncertainty and the vision to lead enterprise-wide transformation.

*Please see our article, “The New Leadership Portrait: Understanding & Unlocking Senior Executive Potential,” for complete definitions and methodology behind this assessment and development approach.

A leader’s current readiness to embrace immediate challenges embodies two components—experience and competencies (indicated in the top half of the graphic). This includes leaders’ career history and notable achievements, as well as their ability to span between the seemingly contradictory dualities of leadership. Our Leadership Span Model™ evaluates an individual’s ability to cope with four major dualities (pragmatic vs. disruptive, measured vs. risk-taking, vulnerable vs. heroic and connecting vs. galvanizing) that characterize the transition into senior leadership roles. While each span may seem contradictory – how can someone be both vulnerable and heroic? – the most successful executives can embody both traits simultaneously.

A leader’s ability to fully realize their potential recognizes that the most successful CEOs are capable of balancing between two types of change-readiness that predict potential: growth factors and potential realization (indicated in the bottom half of the graphic).

Growth factors help identify the executive’s capacity to meet dynamic shifts in environmental and organizational demands, while potential realization helps assess whether an executive possesses the self-knowledge and clarity of purpose to realize their potential in a sustainable way. These growth factors include systems thinking, curiosity and adaptability, drive and resilience, and social intelligence. While potential realization embodies a leaders’ deep self-knowledge, a clear view of their values and aspirations, and an unwavering commitment to their personal legacy and wider impact across the organization, sector, and society.*

Crucially, this new model recognizes that making it to the top job is not the realization of potential. As the world grows more complicated, roles will change and the bar will continually reset. As such, potential realization is an ongoing journey that even the most senior executives must contend with as the context and challenges around them change.

Because the qualities that unlock an executive’s full potential are multi-faceted, layered, and often deeply personal, we no longer view potential as static or innate. Rather, a leader’s potential is dynamic and evolving, influenced by a variety of factors.

Reflecting on today’s CPG landscape and key business drivers, we applied a CPG lens to these Leadership Portrait learnings, identifying five CPG-specific leadership personas that are critical to a CPG CEO’s success and ability to fully realize their potential. As change keeps accelerating and the demand for immediate results increases and grows more complex, we’ve observed that CPG CEOs who can flex among the following leadership personas are most likely to succeed.

Culture shaper & talent maker

As organizations weather massive change, leaders must learn to strike a balance between preserving what’s working in their organization’s culture and fostering a future-focused agility. Leading an organization through cultural transformation requires CPG CEOs with strong social intelligence, as well as a clear view of the wider impact they want to drive across the organization—and beyond. As one CPG CEO told us, “We want to evolve from a culture of knowing to one of learning.” Furthermore, investing in talent development and curating a world-class executive leadership team that is empowered to make important decisions will bolster the odds of scaled, sustainable success.

Future-focused risk taker

Successful CPG CEOs need to confidently drive impactful decisions and value taking risks, while also possessing the conviction and resilience needed to make those hard decisions. In order to win in the market, they must move quickly when thinking about new opportunities, be able to look beyond today, and make decisions based on what’s coming vs. what’s already happened.

Consumer obsessed strategist

CEOs who possess a highly strategic mindset, as well as a genuine enthusiasm for the consumer, will be winners in the CPG landscape going forward. Articulating a vision to deliver commercial success, selecting attractive geographic and/or demographic markets, and executing through dynamic consumer environments will manifest the systems thinking and adaptability noted in our growth factors above.

Transformation & innovation builder

Having an appetite for innovation, building up R&D functions, and leaning into business transformation is key to adapting to the changing environment. If a CEO is unable to lead meaningful innovation across a range of functions —or worse, if they’re unable to recognize that they can’t lead innovation forward—they won’t be able to successfully drive results.

Capital allocator and dealmaker

Capital allocation is key to the portfolio reshaping required to shift a company’s weight from the back to the front foot. CPG CEOs must demonstrate necessary systems thinking around value-creating M&A—including both additions and subtractions, assessing potential deals, decisively recommending actions, and taking calculated risks—especially as deal flow likely will rise (inversely correlated with the US’s expected deregulation, in particular).

The speed of change will continue to accelerate, making CPG leadership contexts more complex. CPG boards must not only look at a CEO’s readiness for the role in the short-term, but understand the CEO’s ability to adapt, flex and grow along with their role, including the leadership personas listed above, to hold on to a sense of direction amidst setbacks, and to operate effectively in first-time conditions. How CPG boards identify, develop, and select the right individuals for leadership, and how they create the conditions for them to succeed as a team, has never been more important.

Authors

Andrew Hayes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ global CPG practice. He is jointly based in New York and Houston.

Dick Patton leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Americas Consumer sector. He is based in Boston.

Sotiria Pericli is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

References

1Jessica Moulton, Pavlos Exarchos, and Warren Teichner, Rescuing the decade: A dual agenda for the consumer goods industry, McKinsey, 11th June 2024

2 Ibid.

3 Ibid.

4 Reckitt, Reckitt to Sharpen Its Portfolio and Simplify Organisation for Accelerated Growth and Value Creation, 24th July 2024, https://www.reckitt.com/media-landing/press-releases/2024/reckitt-to-sharpen-its-portfolio-and-simplify-organisation-for-accelerated-growth-and-value-creation/

5 Harris Atmar, Jeff Cooper, Stefan Rickert, and Rodrigo Slelatt, Consumer goods: A changing landscape for successful M&A, McKinsey, 29th February 2024

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices