Session 3: How Healthcare CEOs Are Embracing AI | RRA AI CEO Lab | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Session 3: How Healthcare CEOs Are Embracing AI

RRA AI CEO Lab

We brought together CEOs from across the healthcare industry, hailing from biopharma, pharma sciences, medical devices, and diagnostics, to hear how they were actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology. Here is what we learned.

Three key takeaways from our conversation with healthcare CEOs who are actively piloting, adopting, and implementing AI technology:

The greatest risk of AI is inaction

Traditional data stacks need to evolve to harness the full potential of AI

The learning capacity of senior leaders is key to AI success

The risk is not leaping on the opportunity of AI quickly enough.”

CEO attendee
RRA AI CEO Labs

How healthcare CEOs are adopting AI

AI has the ability to narrow healthcare’s historical 20-year lag between innovation and the standard of patient care, including through the use of hyper-personalization and leveraging greater productivity across the ecosystem, from R&D, to manufacturing and supply chain, to marketing. One CEO highlighted: “A key area of interest will be observing the integration of AI with the humanization of healthcare.”

CEOs also shared how AI is allowing the company to scale product development, and helping the company to achieve high levels of productivity and cost points. Another shared how Gen-AI helps drive marketing productivity, allowing their company to advertise at 1/1000th of the historical cost.

Key lessons from healthcare CEOs actively adopting AI

Lesson 1: The greatest risk of AI is inaction

The change that AI will bring to healthcare organizations is vast, and entire business models will need to be reimagined. CEOs discussed that adoption of AI in healthcare is challenging, with risks around disintermediation, cybersecurity, the regulatory environment, the acquisition and retention of technology talent, lack of digital maturity, and culture change and resistance. One CEO also referenced the challenges of keeping the value in their company, rather than letting it leak to technologically savvy customers.

The main risk flagged was the pace required to keep up with the AI disruption. As one CEO shared: “This wave is moving very, very fast—faster than the mobile wave and faster than the Internet wave.” Attendees spoke about the threats of being radically disrupted, outperformed, or falling behind the competition, noting that the AI opportunity available to them was also available to their competitors. One CEO stated: “The risk is not leaping on the opportunity of AI quickly enough.”

Lesson 2: Traditional data stacks will need to evolve to harness AI's potential

CEOs highlighted how successful adoption of AI requires simultaneous changes in technology architecture and innovation processes. AI provides the opportunity to process incredible amounts of data and couple proprietary data with externally available sources (data twinning) e.g. scientific and clinical data, or multiple sets of patient records, which previously would have been analyzed in isolation. It was accepted that traditional siloed data stacks must evolve into more integrated and agile frameworks to fully harness AI's potential—although this is only part of the equation.

One CEO shared: “We have gotten over the challenge of ensuring our data is organized in the right way, but having people that understand core business processes and what we're trying to accomplish with AI is a challenge. It's gotten so siloed for so long that we don’t have people with the broad perspective that’s needed to manage across historical silos.”

Two CEOs spoke of their radical tactic of building a new tech stack from scratch adjacent to the organization and integrating it, rather than opting for a protracted systems update and multi-year transformation. Building a brand-new team allowed both organizations to set up a whole new platform in record time.

One shared: “We started our AI journey about seven months ago. Bringing people along was very slow and resistance was high. Instead of trying to lean our processes, change our people, and build the tech stack in parallel, we hired one hundred new people. We now have the AI tech stack and the processes all in one place and we get to see how the future works. We’ve built this for three functions. If the model works, we’ll run it through a dozen other functions.”

Lesson 3: The learning capacity of senior leaders is key to AI success

AI is firmly seen as a CEO mandate, with RRA’s AI Practice lead Fawad Bajwa explaining, “Unlike the role of digital transformation, where you may have had someone you delegated this to, AI tech transformation at the level we're talking about lands squarely on the CEO's lap.”

CEOs are in the process of not only personally upskilling around AI, but also ensuring their senior leadership team understands its potential for business applications. Getting senior leaders more fluent in AI would allow them to think outside the box about how AI could be applied.

One CEO shared: “AI has to be a top-down mandate [from the CEO], driven by the functional leaders so that it flows through every part of the organization. The real question is how to get all the leaders in the organization to think about how AI can fundamentally change every part of the business and come up with their own use cases. We can’t be limited by what's out there today because it’s still early days. We need to find ways to get them to want to learn more about AI and to push the envelope.”

View the previous session

Back to RRA AI CEO Lab main page

View the next session

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices