Mastering disruption: A CEO’s path to market leadership in 2024 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Mastering disruption: A CEO’s path to market leadership in 2024

LeadershipChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionCulture Analytics

Article

Tuck Rickards

November 13, 2024

3 min

LeadershipChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionCulture Analytics

Executive Summary

Leaders must prioritize strengthening the core aspects of their businesses and driving efficiencies internally.

Close

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

Reprinted with permission from Fast Company after originally published on May 07, 2024.

Today’s CEOs face countless challenges—and opportunities—as they navigate changing market dynamics while maintaining profitability and embracing innovation. Tuck Rickards, managing director and global co-head of technology practice for Russell Reynolds Associates, outlines three key stages for the CEO  to survive and thrive in 2024.

Survive: Protect the Core Business

Your immediate focus as a CEO starts at home, Rickards says. It’s critical to prioritize profitable growth and margin improvement across all industries, especially technology businesses. The enormous market pressures of 2023 are continuing and expectations for businesses to change their operating cadence and pivot to more profitable growth, particularly from investors, will continue to ring in CEOs’ ears. Leaders must prioritize strengthening the core aspects of their businesses and driving efficiencies internally.

Beyond those immediate priorities, there is a new pressure emerging to accelerate growth through product line innovation. Rickards stresses that a critical layer to protecting the core business is to accelerate and diversify its growth rapidly. Looking at the data, the valuations of many software companies were more than cut in half, but the companies that have focused on improving margins and making necessary investments in their next-gen product offerings and platforms, such as Microsoft and Salesforce, have nearly doubled since their lows.

For CEOs aiming to survive beyond the immediate market complexity of 2024, it is crucial to develop a roadmap that includes strategic product changes, operational optimization and the integration of AI technologies. By embracing these approaches, CEOs can position their organizations for success in a rapidly evolving market.

Drive: Challenge the Future and Navigate Paradigm Shifts

The second critical layer to the CEO survival roadmap is planning for a future in a radically disruptive market. As AI continues to transform business in countless ways, companies have to plan for fundamental business model changes and long-term investments.

“AI is a very real, existential threat that CEOs need to own,” Rickards says. “They can’t outsource this like they did during the digital transformation.” Some companies have made this transition successfully, such as Microsoft under Satya Nadella’s leadership. Nonetheless, developing a comprehensive transformation agenda that extends beyond short-term objectives will be critical.

Rickards predicts that early adopters of AI will thrive as sector landscapes change radically and stragglers struggle to keep up. “Five years from now, the gaps and valuations are going to be enormous between those who played their cards well versus those who played them badly, or didn’t play them at all.”

“I’m very optimistic for the potential for value creation and reinvention of businesses for people who lean into this and pay attention to it,” Rickards concludes. “But I’m also very realistic about how hard it is to do in the context of managing end-to-end business transformation while flying the plane.”

Strive: Embrace the Bigger Picture

In addition to core growth and transformational agendas, true vanguard CEOs will be remembered for their leadership on broader societal and global issues, Rickards says, emphasizing the importance of toggling between operational performance and strategic initiatives. “The best leaders in the world aren’t walking away from important topics like climate change and inclusive leadership,” he says.

Businesses have an imperative to address societal and environmental concerns; companies that prioritize sustainability and diversity will be better positioned to attract top talent and drive innovation. By aligning corporate objectives with societal goals, Rickards says, CEOs can create a culture of responsibility and resilience that benefits not just their organizations, but also the communities they serve—and be remembered for it.

Along with all the opportunities, there are still challenges in balancing immediate profit pressures with long-term strategic moves. By elevating discussions around paradigm shifts and making incremental decisions within business constraints, CEOs can help ensure their businesses aren’t being left behind.

Thrive: Looking Ahead

CEO legacies are often most defined by transformative impact and positioning a team and organization for the future. Rickards points to thoughtful succession planning as a critical indicator of a business prepared for the future by its CEO. Through fostering a pipeline of potential successors through hands-on experience and collaboration, CEOs create an organization that’s built for impact and mastered disruption.

Authors

Tuck Rickards leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice and is an Executive Board member at Fast Company. He is based in San Francisco.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices