How to Attract and Retain Portfolio CFOs in a Competitive Market | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How to Attract and Retain Portfolio CFOs in a Competitive Market

Portfolio Company LeadershipFinance OfficersExecutive Search

Article

February 03, 2025

7 min

Portfolio Company LeadershipFinance OfficersExecutive Search

Executive Summary

How to recruit a portfolio CFO when private equity comes roaring back.

Close

Linda Barham

Chicago

Mike Heberlein

Minneapolis - St Paul

David Norton

Chicago

It’s an incredibly competitive market for private equity portfolio CFOs.

After the bubble of high valuations and abundant transactions burst, the market’s continued imbalance between exits and dealmaking shows that the private equity industry is not yet out of the woods.1 However, investors sit on an increasing amount of dry powder and expected interest rate cuts suggest that the ‘exit logjam’ will finally open in 2025, potentially unlocking the tight portfolio CFO talent market. When this occurs, opportunities will increase for experienced portfolio CFOs, and investors and portfolio company CEOs will be tasked anew with retaining and attracting CFOs in this complex market.

To better understand CFO hiring trends in the US private equity landscape, Russell Reynolds Associates mapped 17 mid-cap to mega-cap private equity firms’ portfolio companies. In analyzing a representative 150 portfolio companies (20% of the firms’ portfolio companies across sectors), we identified their CFOs’ journeys to the top, learning that:

Portfolio CFO turnover is twice as high as public company CFO turnover

Private equity firms overwhelmingly look externally for CFO talent

Competition for experience is the norm

To create new talent pools, private equity firms will need to get creative to retain and recruit portfolio CFOs. Read on as we delve into these trends and what they mean for attracting and retaining portfolio CFOs in an increasingly competitive market.

Portfolio CFO turnover is twice as high as public company CFO turnover

It’s perhaps unsurprising that most portfolio CFO turnover occurs after the deal, with 69% of these CFOs stepping into the role post-investment. On average, portfolio companies have 2 CFOs per deal (LBO/buyout), with an average holding period of 5 years, resulting in an average tenure of 2.5 years. In comparison, the average tenure for outgoing public company CFOs is 5.6 years.2

Specifically, as the portfolio CFO market grows more competitive, mid-cap and large-cap funds that rely on hiring externally have experienced increased turnover recently as they try to unlock value (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Portfolio CFO tenure by private equity fund size

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of 150 US portfolio company CFOs, 2024

Private equity firms overwhelmingly look externally for CFO talent

Over 80% of portfolio CFOs are external hires—almost double the percentage of S&P 500 CFOs (Figure 2).  While public companies are starting to see succession planning’s positive impacts, most portfolio companies don’t have the luxury of deep talent benches. One factor impacting portfolio companies' bench strength is the lack of equity as a component of compensation incentives for more junior talent on the team. Without these equity incentives, developing and retaining top talent is difficult.

Figure 2. CFO hiring   ̶̶̶  Internal versus external

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of 150 US portfolio company CFOs, 2024 and S&P 500 CFO analysis, 2024

Competition for experience is the norm

The majority of portfolio CFOs (57%) have previous CFO experience, while the majority of S&P 500 CFOs are in the role for the first time (58%)(Figure 3)  , aligning with the external-internal dynamic mentioned previously (Figure 2).

In 2022, 73% of portfolio CFOs had previously been a portfolio CFO,3 compared to only 48% in 2024. Yet as demand for proven portfolio CFOs increases, these leaders have  become harder to attract, due to persistent lack of exit activity.

Figure 3. CFO experience   ̶̶̶  First-time versus experienced

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of 150 US portfolio company CFOs, 2024 and S&P 500 CFO analysis, 2024

While S&P 500 organizations tend to promote first-time talent from within, when portfolio companies embrace first-time CFOs, the majority (59%) are hired outside the organization due in part to the aforementioned lack of bench strength. Of the first-time CFOs hired externally, only 24% bring portfolio company experience, while the majority (76%) bring significant public company experience; this is a tradeoff organizations are willing to make for the rigor of public company experience.

Portfolio and public CFOs follow similar routes to the top

Though portfolio CFOs are more likely to be external hires and tend to have more sitting CFO experience than S&P 500 CFOs, the two groups’ career paths are largely the same.

For  both portfolio and public company first-time CFOs, finance operations is the most commonly held prior role, with 54% and 42% respectively hailing from these backgrounds (Figure 4.) Interestingly, a sizable portion of first time CFOs (20% of portfolio company and 23% of S&P 500 CFOs) come from a non-finance roles, such as investor, strategy, COO, or divisional CEO roles.

Figure 4: Role prior to first CFO role (Portfolio company vs. S&P 500)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of 150 US portfolio company CFOs, 2024 and S&P 500 CFO analysis, 2024

Despite some surface-level differences—portfolio CFOs are, on average, two years younger than public company CFOs, and are slightly more likely to hold CPAs (39% vs 33%)—both populations follow similar routes to the top. As such, while the market will continue to be competitive for experienced CFOs, considering first-time talent from public companies, where their role scope and scale is often larger in size, offers an attractive alternative.

How to attract and retain portfolio CFOs in a competitive market

Get creative around the CFO profile

As the CFO market remains tight, reconsidering must-haves—including previous portfolio experience, location, or IPO experience—may allow for an expanded talent pool that offers the opportunity to access more diverse candidates. Additionally, selectively considering and appropriately assessing first-time CFOs may help to broaden the talent pool and offer  the opportunity to access a more diverse slate of candidates.

Differentiate the firm’s and portfolio company’s value proposition

Be clear about the organization’s value proposition, strategy, and potential. Being open and transparent about key financial metrics and growth targets can help attract high-caliber candidates. Not only is the organization’s value proposition important, but the CFO’s potential partnership with the sponsor can offer similar, or even greater selling points for your candidate.

Get competitive about compensation

In a competitive market with many CFOs waiting to meet their liquidity event, compensation remains key to extracting and retaining seated talent—particularly as CFOs assess both VC and PE opportunities and the potential equity value. Great talent is listening for the right value proposition and competitive compensation package, including cash.

You’ve landed your next CFO. Now what?

Once you hire your next CFO, how can you ensure that they will be successful in role?

Unprecedented increases in CFO turnover and hasty transitions, have produced leadership gaps that continue to impede a talented financial executive’s success in the role. These gaps include poor communication, inability to establish as a strategic and trustworthy partner to the CEO and investors, and an inability to modulate with different operating cadences. Invest in assessing and developing your new CFO to ensure they gain immediate traction and are empowered to achieve long-term success in your organization.

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice in the Americas. She is based in Chicago.

Jordan Frantz is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Boston.

Mike Heberlein is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Minneapolis.

David Norton is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Chicago.

Shira Ophir is a member Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Dallas.

Catherine Schroeder leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

Sources

1.	Q3 2024 US PE Breakdown | Pitchbook

2.	Global CFO Turnover Index, | Russell Reynolds Associates

3.	Portfolio Company CFOs: Rethinking the Hiring Blueprint  | Russell Reynolds Associates

Appendix

How to Attract and Retain Portfolio CFOs in a Competitive Market

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices