Future-proofing the Family Business | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Future-proofing the Family Business

SuccessionCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

Burak Gorbon

December 09, 2024

4 min

SuccessionCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Unlock secrets of enduring family businesses: Gulf firms can emulate Europe's centenarian dynasties in succession, leadership, and benchmarking.

Close

Burak Gorbon

Dubai

What family-owned businesses in the Gulf can learn from Europe’s oldest dynasties

Compared to their European counterparts, most family-owned conglomerates in the Gulf are relatively young, dating back to the 1950s. Aside from a few notable exceptions, the majority are still either run by the founder, or the children of the founder. It’s rare to find any large family business over a hundred years old.

The truth is, very few businesses of any type of ownership manage to survive for anywhere near that length of time today. Recent research by McKinsey found that the average life span of an S&P 500 business today is less than 18 years, whereas it was 61 years in 1958.

Yet some European dynasties have stood the test of time and survived for over a century. So, what can family-owned businesses in the Gulf learn from these organizations? Russell Reynolds Associates partnered with Italy’s prestigious Bocconi University to undertake research into 10 of Europe’s most enduring family businesses to uncover the secrets of their survival. All of these businesses were either third generation, or at least 100 years old.

From this research, we share three key lessons that are just as apt for family businesses in the Gulf.

Lesson one: pro-active succession planning

Succession is something families don’t want to think about or discuss—either because it’s too emotionally difficult, or because it might create conflict and tension between family members. Often, there are unspoken assumptions about who will or should eventually take over, without assessing whether they have the right leadership skills, experience, and potential to lead the business into the future.

It’s important to assess potential candidates early and have honest and open conversations about who does—and crucially, who doesn’t —want to be involved in the business. And don’t just look to the next generation, but the one after that. Try to imagine how their talents and passions might fit into the family business as it evolves in the future. We’re currently working with a leading, forward-thinking Dubai family business to do this, but they are very much pioneers in this regard.

Lesson two: nurturing future successors

In the Gulf, many family businesses are conglomerates with an incredibly diverse portfolio. But, future successors within the family often reside within one of these businesses, with little knowledge or experience of the others. Then suddenly, they find themselves in charge of running an entire group of very different businesses, each demanding a completely unique set of knowledge and skills.

Rotating future leaders through the group’s various operations is essential for developing the broad expertise required to manage a complex and diverse enterprise.

Another potential pitfall is what the Germans call betriebsblindheit or ‘business blindness’. Often, family members have only ever worked within the family business, so they don’t know what ‘good’ looks like. So as well as spending time in different companies within the family’s portfolio, it’s equally important for them to gain an outside perspective—either through external work experience or by connecting with other family business executives who can provide fresh insights. For example, various European families by design send their next generation to other academy companies for extended internships to expose them to best-in class entrepreneurship, system thinking, efficient and effective governance, as well as performance management.

Lesson three: external benchmarking

The Gulf’s business landscape has dramatically evolved since the 1970s. Almost all family businesses in the Gulf began by representing international brands. Now, we’re in a new era, with more dynamic markets, homegrown brands, global competition, and foreign direct investment.

While family businesses in the Gulf have uniquely navigated their region's transformation, adopting a more proactive, externally oriented approach—as exemplified by Europe's centenarian dynasties—can help ensure their longevity. By prioritizing succession planning, leadership development, and objective benchmarking, Gulf family enterprises can future-proof their legacies and capitalize on the inherent advantages of family ownership. In an increasingly unpredictable world, these time-tested strategies offer a blueprint for enduring success.

Author

Burak Gorbon, member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Middle East leadership team. He is based in Dubai.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices