The Consumer CEO’s Compass: How to Steer Your C-suite Towards Success | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Consumer CEO’s Compass: How to Steer Your C-suite Towards Success

Leadership StrategiesInclusionSuccessionConsumerConsumer ProductsLeisure and HospitalityRetail and LuxuryAssessment and BenchmarkingC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionInclusion and Culture

Article

December 02, 2024

7 min

Leadership StrategiesInclusionSuccessionConsumerConsumer ProductsLeisure and HospitalityRetail and LuxuryAssessment and BenchmarkingC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

The five questions that consumer CEOs aiming to elevate their C-suites can’t afford to ignore.

Close

Stacey Shapiro

Atlanta

Michelle Chan Crouse

Singapore

Executive and board confidence in their leadership teams hits a record low

Over the past few years, consumer CEOs have faced consistent disruption that has created a constantly shifting reality. And while all CEOs are battling geopolitical, economic, and technological uncertainties, consumer CEOs also need to navigate the accelerated rate at which consumer behavior is actively changing. For the consumer industry, change has become the new normal.

Anticipation and planning for the new normal is always top of mind - volatility and constant change is our new daily reality.”

Mark Clouse
CEO, Campbell's

As CEOs’ C-suite teams are the driving force behind a company’s performance, one might expect their C-suite’ success to be a top priority. But concerningly, consumer executive’s and board’s confidence in their leadership teams (ELTs) has been declining, reaching a record low in the first half of 2024 (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Consumer executive and board confidence in their ELTs (2021 – 2024)

LCI timeline-consumer c-suiteELT Leadership Confidence index (Consumer)
COVID-19 vaccine available​
Dec 2020

65.2

H1 2021

Russia invades Ukraine
Feb 2022

63.3

H1 2022

Global inflation at its highest since the 1990s​
July 2022

63.7

H2 2022

ChatGPT launched​
Nov 2022

64.1

H1 2023

The collapse of Silicon Valley Bank
March 2023

62.6

H2 2023

Start of Israel-Hamas War
Oct 2023

60+ countries to hold national elections​
Through 2024

61.3

H1 2024

The Leadership Confidence Index captures the view of CEOs, C-suite leaders, next-generation leaders (those one to two levels below the C-suite), and board directors on the effectiveness of their organization’s executive leadership team (ELT) across three constructs: capability, behavior, and issue management—all of which are in decline. Responses to 11 items are combined into an overall Leadership Confidence Index on a 100-point scale, as well as a sub-index on each of the three constructs
Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor | Base: Consumer– H1 2021 (n=314), H1 2022 (n=213), H2 2022 (n=260), H1 2023 (n=211), H2 2023 (n=469), H1 2024 (n=531).

The five questions consumer CEOs can't afford to ignore

To address this, Russell Reynolds Associates identified five dimensions of leadership team health that are critical influences over C-suite performance. Augmenting these insights with qualitative learnings from our fifth annual CEO Perspectives on Talent series, we developed recommendations for consumer CEOs aiming to elevate their C-suites.

Commitment and Alignment

Does the team have a clear purpose and goal alignment that enables enterprise success?

% of Consumer leaders selecting ‘describes completely’ on a 4 pt scale of their C-suite team

33%

Displays high commitment to organizational purpose

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor | Base: Consumer: H2 2023 (n=1,016).

Easier said than done: Only one third of consumer CEOs are succeeding in setting a clear purpose and ensuring goal alignment

“Setting a clear purpose and ensuring goal alignment” is a line commonly found in CEO job specs. And while creating a vision and setting objectives is a requirement for all CEOs, according to our Global Leadership Monitor, only 33% of leaders in the consumer space agree that their C-suites are truly committed to their organization’s purpose. This suggests that only a third of CEOs are succeeding in making sure that their entire ELT is, in fact, committed and aligned.

Having an enterprise mindset creates a strong sense of commitment and alignment on goals

Enterprise mindset – Top performing CXOs prioritize actions and decisions that lead to the entire enterprise’s success, even if that means trading off on their own individual outcomes.

North Star – CEOs should ask themselves and their teams: "which star am I following?”. Ensuring that every person on the C-suite is aligned around the same star is paramount.

Less is more – Aligning a team around fewer – but achievable – goals creates clarity in decision-making and reinforces overall focus.

Having a purpose and a North Star is one of the key elements for a company's ability to adapt to the evolving market conditions."

Roberto Marques
Former CEO, Natura

Nowadays, saying ‘NO’ to almost everything is the fastest track to success.”

Carsten Keller
CEO, Chrono 24

Composition and Structure

Is the team’s size and configuration suited to the organization’s maturity and its progress on a strategic journey?

Most consumer leaders don’t feel they have the right team around the table

Our research shows that a mere 16% of consumer leaders feel that the composition of their C-suite team aligns with the strategy of the organization. Related, only 19% of these leaders feel their C-suite represents a breadth of skills, background, and experience required for their future strategy. These are the lowest levels across the five leadership effectiveness factors that we analyzed.

% of Consumer leaders selecting ‘describes completely’ on a 4 pt scale of their C-suite team

16%

Composition of the C-suite team aligns with the vision/strategy of the organization as the organization matures

19%

C-suite represents a breadth of skills, background, and experience that contribute to strategic thinking

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor | Base: Consumer: H2 2023 (n=1,016).

A leadership team is a living organism – CEOs should play an active role in nurturing its composition and health

This isn’t just about the size of an organization’s C-suite—it’s also about ensuring a diversity of roles, backgrounds, and thought. Leadership team composition isn’t constant – it’s something that CEOs and boards need to proactively monitor as their short and long-term priorities shift, rather than periodically intervening when its vitals are flashing red. C-suite composition needs to be aligned with the size and geographical spread of the organization, its culture and, most importantly, its forward-looking strategy.

CEOs need to take a stand on diversity

While diversity is often seen as something that CHROs/Nomination Committees own, a CEO also needs to play a pivotal role in demonstrating visible leadership, as a role model and change agent. CEOs have an opportunity to distinguish their organizations and their own leadership by framing diversity and inclusion as a lever for achieving their company’s strategic business objectives.

Capability and Skills

Are the skills represented on the team today relevant to driving our strategy?

CEOs need a team that excels in dealing with the relentless pace of change

As consumer behavior continues rapidly changing post-pandemic, technology innovations accelerate, sustainability concerns increase, and demographics shift, it’s critical for CEOs to ensure they have a team with the right mix of skills to navigate this new level of complexity.

Agility – recognizing that things are constantly changing – rapidly course correcting and doing it with the least amount of friction within the organization and operating teams”

Sean Connolly
CEO, Conagra

All consumer CEOs want leaders with agility and digital mindsets on their top teams

Of course, every organization will have its own take on what are the most relevant skills needed for their top teams. Generally, it comes down to ensuring the C-suite team’s capabilities and experiences – collectively and individually – align with the organization's strategy.

Every CEO we spoke to in our 2024 CEO Perspectives on Talent series noted two crucial skills they want to see on their teams:

Adaptability – A leader’s ability to modify approaches and show resilience in the face of setbacks is what differentiates a good CXO from a great one.

Harnessing digital – A tech-fluent C-suite is key to unlocking new opportunities for innovation, efficiency, and competitive advantage. When it comes to AI, while not everyone needs to be a deep expert, it’s critical to understand how existing roles will evolve because of generative AI. According to RRA’s AI Leadership Labs,1 to be able to spot AI-driven opportunities, everyone on the C-suite should aim for '30 percent' of the AI awareness/ knowledge.

"You only need about 30 percent fluency in a handful of technical topics to develop your digital mindset. We call this the 30 percent rule. To understand the 30 percent rule, think about learning a foreign language. To demonstrate mastery of the English language, a nonnative speaker must acquire roughly 12,000 vocabulary words. But to be able to communicate and interact effectively with other people in the workplace, all they need is about 3,500 to 4,000 words—about 30 percent of what it takes to achieve mastery.”

- An excerpt from The Digital Mindset: What It Really Takes to Thrive in the Age of Data, Algorithms, and AI by Paul Leonardi and Tsedal Neeley.

Culture and Behavior

Does the team work well together and enable the rest of the organization?

Strong organizational culture can serve as the foundation that helps businesses navigate uncertainty

Our research shows that high-performing Consumer C-suite teams are stewards of organizational culture that enables trust, agility and ownership.

However, only 21% of consumer leaders feel that their C-suite displays a high level of trust that is visible across multiple levels of the organization. And only a slightly higher 30% of leaders feel their C-suite demonstrates accountability and ownership in organizational performance.

% of Consumer leaders selecting ‘describes completely’ on a 4 pt scale of their C-suite team

21%

Displays a high level of trust that is visible across multiple levels of the organization

30%

Demonstrates accountability and ownership in organizational performance

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor | Base: Consumer: H2 2023 (n=1,016).

Effective C-suite teams shape an organizational culture that fosters trust, agility, and a sense of ownership

Trust – While trust, of course, is key for open communication and collaboration among executives, what is critical in the context of the 'new normal’ is that trusted relationships at the C-suite level accelerate decision-making – allowing them to move faster, enable constructive conflict, and foster agility.

Agility – Although hiring individuals who are intellectually agile is crucial, it’s just as important to create a culture that empowers people to act and make decisions quickly. An entrepreneurial approach (even within large organizations) and the ability to implement agile methods are main ingredients of C-suite success.

Ownership – It is crucial to build an environment where individuals feel empowered to take ownership and act independently. Clearly defining roles, decision-making authority, and effective delegation are key to fostering a culture of boldness and responsibility.

Building trust is key to a strong organizational culture, as it enables transparent conversations about how things are changing around us.”

Salman Amin
CEO, pladis

The name of the game in the next decade will be unpredictability and therefore agility and speed will become critical factors not only of success but also of survival.”

Gianluca Di Tondo
CEO, Barilla

Continuity and Succession

Do we have a deep, diverse, and engaged pipeline of next-generation leaders?

The majority of C-suite leaders are open to opportunities outside their current employer—but most consumer organizations don’t have proactive succession plans

% of Consumer leaders

26%

Have a proactive succession plan, using a formal process and set of criteria

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor | Base: Consumer: H1 2024 (n=179).

CEOs know that a robust and strategic C-suite succession plan helps mitigate risks. However, this knowledge isn’t always translating into action.

While our Monitor shows that a shocking 68% of consumer leaders are open to making a career change beyond their current employer, it also finds that only 26% of consumer organizations are proactively succession planning for their C-suite. This disconnect opens consumer C-suites and their companies up to massive risk.

The good news: things are improving. Our data shows that more consumer organizations than last year are implementing succession planning for their mission-critical C-suite roles (2pp increase from 2023 to 2024 H1), and we expect this trend to only accelerate going forward.

Successful C-suite succession planning starts with CEO

Typically, when proactive succession planning takes place, the responsibility directly falls on CHROs and nomination committees. However, in speaking to the consumer organizations with long-term succession practices, we discovered that successful C-suite succession processes start with the CEO.

Succession is part of your future-readiness strategy

The most forward-thinking organizations develop systematic approaches that help identify the skills needed to address future business needs. Benchmarking internal talent against the external market helps CEOs understand what is possible in the future and consider talent that has those skills, or the ability to develop them.

C-suite succession planning is not a one-off exercise

Succession planning is not a one-off event – it is a process that allows for continuous development of the succession pipeline. As business objectives evolve, so should the pipeline of potential successors.

Development and succession decisions should be regularly reconsidered. Succession planning is not a destination, it is a way to travel!

We're always looking at the successor lists - these lists change more frequently than you might think. Continuous review allows for development to influence our thinking on succession.”

Brendan Foley
CEO, McCormick

How can consumer CEOs create a high-performing, future equipped C-suite?

Identify, articulate, and harness your C-suite’s collective capabilities

Develop and build leadership teams that can unlock the true potential of Artificial Intelligence (AI)

Assess and develop your C-suite team

Build organizational culture that fosters trust, agility, and a sense of ownership

Find and develop the next generation of C-suite leaders

Authors

Stacey Shapiro is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. She is based in Atlanta.
Claus Fischer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Retail and Luxury practice. He is based in Hamburg.
Michelle Chan Crouse leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer team in APAC. She is based in Singapore.
Aleksandra Zacharova is a Global Consumer Knowledge Director. She is based in London.

The Consumer CEO’s Compass: How to Steer Your C-suite Towards Success

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices