Future-Proofing the C-suite: Addressing the COO Succession Imperative | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Future-Proofing the C-suite: Addressing the COO Succession Imperative

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceLeadershipSuccessionConsumerFinancial ServicesHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Article

+ 1 author

January 06, 2025

8 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceLeadershipSuccessionConsumerFinancial ServicesHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

COO turnover is high, but many organizations lack succession plans. Our research outlines key actions to prioritize.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

As the COO role grows increasingly strategic, more companies are incorporating the position into their C-suites. Alongside turnover and retirements, this has led to a surge in COO-related succession, search and associated advisory work as organizations integrate the new role, seek replacements, or require support in complex leadership challenges from executive transition to top team effectiveness.

This increased demand prompted us to deepen our understanding of the COO talent market. To accomplish this and support COOs, CEOs, and HR leaders’ succession planning efforts, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed survey responses from 159 COOs and examined demographic data of 425 COOs worldwide, learning that:

Over 70% of COOs globally are ready to make a career move beyond their current employer, with top reasons related to career growth.1

A large proportion of US COOs are nearing retirement age, indicating an impending boom in departures.

Most organizations globally are not prepared for their COO’s departure, as only 22% have a proactive succession plan in place.2

Navigating career transitions: The rising mobility of COOs

Our H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor reveals that COOs are more inclined to make career moves than their C-suite peers: 71% of surveyed COOs are open to external opportunities, compared to 63% of all global C-suite executives. Historical data from the US market aligns with this, as the COO turnover rate has been notably higher than that of CEOs, CFOs, CMOs, or CHROs, and trended upwards between 2020 to 2022 (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Fortune 1000 turnover by year (%): CEO, COO, CFO, CMO & CHRO

Source: Imberg, Maya. 2023 Spotlight: C-Suite Turnover in the US. BoardEx. March 30, 2023.

What’s motivating your COO to make a career move?

Our H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor found that 59% of COOs aspire to become CEOs, compared to 43% of the broader C-suite.

Additionally, 46% of COOs believe their current role provides a clear path to becoming a CEO, versus 30% of the C-suite, on average.

Although better compensation is often a factor in COO’s career moves, our data shows that the primary reasons they leave roles are related to career growth—with COOs naming “career advancement” and “seeking new responsibilities” as the top two reasons they would be willing to leave their employers (Figure 2). One such career advancement opportunity is stepping into the CEO position, as the COO role is one of the most common CEO feeder roles in the United States.

Beyond career advancement, COO’s top five motivations for a career move are aligned with the rest of the C-suite—with one notable exception. Across the broader C-suite, a “desire to feel more valued by the organization,” was the fourth most common reason leaders gave for leaving their organizations. But for COOs, this was replaced by "seeking different types of leadership."

Figure 2: Reason for willingness to change employer – COOs vs. rest of the C-suite

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, N=86 COOs, N=858 C-level executives.

This difference may be explained by our Leadership Confidence Index, which found that COOs have even less confidence in the board and CEO than the rest of the C-suite (Figure 3). These differences in confidence are likely due to the stressors of managing through crises and disruptions over the last several years, as well as COO’s heightened exposure to top leadership. This confidence gap is particularly concerning, given the overall decline in leaders' confidence in their executive team, which has reached a three-year low.

Figure 3: CEO and Board behaviour - To what extent do you agree or disagree that your CEO and Board

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, N=122/81 COOs, N=1,232/828 C-level executives.

The low confidence COOs have in their CEOs and boards highlights the need to enhance team effectiveness among these leaders, building trust and psychological safety as foundational components. To inspire confidence and become a high-performing leadership team, it is essential for those at the top of the organization to role model the right culture, collaborate across functions, and demonstrate openness to change.  As COOs become more strategic, top leadership and the board are collaborating with them more, marking a new dynamic where COOs have a stronger presence at the table.

Managing retirement risks: Ensuring continuity in COO leadership

In the US, we are observing an impending COO retirement boom. A significant proportion of COOs are reaching retirement age, creating tangible concern for employers. Our analysis of 300 COOs from the Fortune 1000 list reveals that over 43% are aged 58 and above. And within Fortune’s largest company segment (companies with +$10 billion in annual revenue), this proportion is even higher at 50%.

However, there are notable differences among industries: the healthcare industry, followed by the industrial and consumer industries, have the highest proportion of COOs aged 58 or above (52%, 47%, and 44%, respectively.) And within the healthcare space, nearly half of the COOs are at least 60 years old (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Age distribution of COOs across Fortune 1000 companies by industry

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of 300 COOs from the Fortune 1000 list, July 2024.

COOs approaching retirement may not seek another role due to factors like burnout, financial security, or simply finding retirement to be the more attractive option. Given how challenging the role has been and continues to be, organizations should take the appeals of retirement seriously. COOs have led through significant economic and geopolitical uncertainty over the past several years. In addition to persistent periods of unpredictability, the majority of COOs are now navigating large-scale transformations, with heightened sustainability expectations and ongoing digital advancements, including the evolving AI revolution. These complexities are compounded by talent and skills scarcity across organizational levels.

The data suggests that the market as a whole—and certain industries in particular—are at risk of losing a significant number of COOs to retirement in the next few years. Organizations without a healthy internal talent pipeline may face a shortage of experienced leaders, resulting in heightened competition for qualified external candidates.

Bridging the gap: The dire need for effective succession planning

Despite these circumstances, our leadership succession data shows that only 22% of surveyed COOs in 2024 believe that their organization is proactively developing succession plans via a formal process and criteria (Figure 5). Additionally, only 19% of surveyed COOs are currently part of a formal leadership succession program.

Figure 5: How COOs rate their organization’s succession practices

(% of respondents)

22%

Proactive - Succession plans are created in advance using a formal process and set of criteria

38%

Reactive - When a succession need is identified, we activate a formal process and set of criteria

40%

Informal - Succession processes are informal and unstructured

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, N=107 COOs.

Organizations that establish robust succession planning processes can set them apart from approximately 80% of market players, who have reactive or informal processes in place. Additionally, by taking related steps—like establishing diversity metrics, identifying external talent, and benchmarking internal candidates against the market—COO succession processes can grow even more distinct.

Proactive strategies: Cultivating leaders and strengthening succession plans

As COOs globally grow more open to leaving their employers, a looming retirement boom is also expected shrink the pool of experienced replacements. Meanwhile, the role's increasing strategic importance is prompting more companies to add it to their C-suite, boosting demand. As a result, focusing on succession planning and keeping a strong COO talent pipeline is more important than ever.

To accomplish this, organizations must:

Understand and manage the talent pool: To succeed, companies need a clear understanding of their talent pool and an objective process for identifying the best candidate beyond the "heir apparent." "Ready now" successors aren't always available, so organizations should also identify longer-term successors who might require two to three years of targeted development. This process can also highlight the need to consider external candidates when no viable internal successor exists.

Develop a robust pipeline of talent: To avoid competing for external COO talent, organizations should establish programs to develop and maintain strong pipelines of high-performing next generation talent. This includes identifying high potentials and investing in their training and development well in advance of succession events to ensure a healthy internal pool of qualified candidates. Additionally, fostering mentorship relationships and providing diverse experiences can further prepare these individuals for future leadership roles.

Establish a differentiating succession process: While a great succession planning system is critical, several factors differentiate an exceptional approach from a merely good one. RRA research has identified the unique differentiators that contribute to effective succession planning for this C-suite role.

It starts with business goals and objectives

It is focused on future—and not just current— needs

It is done in partnership with the CEO

It is viewed as good governance and has board oversight

It dives several layers below the C-suite to develop future leaders

It is intentional about diversity, equity, and inclusion

It positions the organization as a talent academy

Prioritizing the above initiatives and successfully implementing them offers significant benefits: a healthy operations and supply chain leader pipeline minimizes risk and disruption, enhances business continuity, accelerates agility, reduces costs, and boosts employee morale.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Toronto.

Ben Shrewsbury is a senior leader within Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Dallas.

Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.

Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.

Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.

References

1 Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, N=122 COOs.

2 Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, N=107 COOs.

Future-Proofing the C-suite

Addressing the COO Succession Imperative

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices