Overcome Decision Paralysis: Finding Order in Chaos | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Overcoming Decision Paralysis: Finding Order in Chaos

Can your leaders confidently make decisions when they don’t have all the information? We explore how systems thinking can help leaders navigate complexity and ambiguity.

Connect with our experts

Systems thinking definition     Benefits of systems thinking     How to become a systems thinker

Remember when decision-making was straightforward? When leaders  made judgment calls based on clear market data, predictable consumer behavior, and well-defined industry boundaries? Today, the world looks very different—and this new reality demands a fundamental shift in how leaders analyze information and approach problem solving.

In today's interconnected business landscape, the problems leaders encounter are rarely isolated; they often span multiple departments, stakeholders, industries, and geographies. Gone are the days when leaders could rely on clear-cut data and straight forward cause-and-effect relationships. Today’s leaders are expected to make high-stakes decisions with incomplete information from a growing list of sources, deal with conflicting priorities, and deftly predict unintended consequences.

In this new reality, systems thinking—or the ability to navigate ambiguity and complexity—has become a critical leadership capability. Leaders who possess this skill are able to synthesize a vast amount of information, connect seemingly disparate dots, and make informed decisions. They understand the intricate web of relationships that define their organizations and markets and are able to bring their stakeholders along on the journey ahead. In an unpredictable world, this ability offers them a  crucial edge.

What does systems thinking mean in the leadership context?

Synthesizes ambiguous and discrepant information.

Effectively evaluates situations without oversimplifying.

Connects diverse issues and data into coherent insights.

Leverages intuitive insights to clarify vague information.

Prefers higher levels of complexity and utilizes logical reasoning processes.

Quickly grasps new concepts and acquires understanding with ease.

When leaders become paralyzed with information, the analogy that always comes to mind is that they’re standing too close to the Pointillism painting. All they can see is a bunch of dots. It’s only when they step back that they’re able to get out of the details and see the bigger picture. Systems thinkers are able to find that balance between the big picture and the finer details.

Dana Landis
Leadership advisor, Russell Reynolds Associates

Why is systems thinking such an important leadership skill?

Systems thinking enables leaders to see patterns where others see only chaos. They are able to navigate complex and ambiguous situations. They are able to absorb information, pay attention to what is meaningful and what is a distraction, weigh up the risks, and make a decision on the path forward.

While these leaders often arrive quickly at their solutions, they must be careful to bring their organizations along. If these leaders do not show how they arrived at a conclusion, they can risk alienating and de-motivating their teams. Leaders need to be able to walk this line, blending their high intelligence with self-awareness and an attunement of the people around them.

Those who can do this typically deliver four key benefits.

01

Enhanced problem solving.

Systems thinking dramatically improves a leader's ability to solve complex problems. By understanding the interconnections within an organization and the ecosystems within which it sits, they are able to consider a wider range of inputs and outcomes, leading to more informed and forward-thinking choices. This approach leads to more effective, longer-lasting solutions that address issues holistically, reducing the likelihood of unintended consequences, and the recurrence of problems.

02

Ability to cut through complexity.

Systems thinkers are able to translate a wide range of complex inputs into a coherent strategy. They can navigate a sea of information, distinguishing between crucial insights and peripheral noise. But they don’t just plow forward in isolation. They are instead able to transform their intricate analyses into a straightforward, compelling narrative that galvanizes the entire organization and stakeholders around the journey ahead. This is particularly helpful in times of crisis or transformation, when these leaders are able to quickly develop and communicate a point of view on the best path forward, providing a welcome sense of direction to an organization that might otherwise be paralyzed by indecision.

03

Stronger innovation and creativity.

By breaking down silos and encouraging cross-functional thinking, a systems thinker creates an environment ripe for innovation. Their holistic view often leads to breakthrough ideas that wouldn't emerge from traditional, linear thinking. Take sustainability, for example. A systems thinker would look beyond immediate actions like reducing energy consumption, and instead examine the company's entire operations, supply chain, and stakeholder relationships. They might identify unexpected connections, such as how sustainable practices could open new market opportunities, and in turn, transform sustainability from a compliance issue into a strategic advantage.

04

Enhanced stakeholder management.

Systems thinking provides leaders with a more comprehensive view of their stakeholder ecosystem—even as it becomes more complex and diverse. By understanding the interplay between employees, customers, suppliers, investors, and communities, leaders can better balance competing interests and create value for all parties. They also know what information to share and with whom, flexing their communication across different stakeholder groups. This approach leads to more sustainable relationships, improved reputation management, and ultimately, long-term organizational success.

Organizations led by systems thinkers are not only more resilient in the face of disruption but are also more innovative, collaborative, and purpose-driven. They're better equipped to navigate the complexities of our interconnected world and to create sustainable value for all stakeholders.

Erin Zolna
Leadership advisor, Russell Reynolds Associates

How can leaders become systems thinkers?

Of course, systems thinking comes more naturally to some people than others. But executives always have the chance to refine some or all of their leadership style. All leadership skills can be hugely improved with attention, focus, self-awareness, and self-regulation.

Start with self. The best leaders are voracious consumers of data and are constantly finding ways to create space in their schedules to stay curious outside the “day to day” of their roles. They convert their self-awareness into “self-knowledge”—the ability to adjust their behaviors and their rituals to take into account when they are in positive or negative situations. They know what triggers their stress and energy depletion and have mechanisms for recovery (both physical and mental) that they apply consistently.

Strong networks. Leaders need broad and rich networks—inside and outside of their organizations, and at multiple levels. The best leaders are very connected, hearing 360-degree inputs from employees levels down, their peers, and a wide range of external sources. These insights are not only critical to ongoing self-awareness and development—they also help leaders to filter each new instinct through a trusted set of colleagues and team members who will challenge and even redirect to get the optimal outcome.

Intentional inclusion. Great leaders assertively pull perspectives from everywhere into their decision-making processes. No matter how expansive or fast thinking a leader may be, their pattern recognition will be improved if they actively get other brains on the challenge and resist the temptation to go it alone. Every leader needs a “kitchen cabinet” to help them hear the truth and make the right decisions. Nothing is truer than the adage that senior leaders don't hear the unvarnished truth enough—so great leaders seek it out.

The power of stories. As leaders own their development journeys and prioritize moments of reflection, stories can be an especially effective way of demonstrating authenticity and vulnerability.  Some leaders are natural storytellers they need to make sure their stories don’t sound too slick or superficial. Other leaders struggle with opening up and sharing—requiring structure, practice, and feedback to hone a few stories that can make an impact.

Systems thinking in action

An excerpt from Sustainable Leadership, a book by Clarke Murphy

João Paulo Ferreira
CEO, Natura &Co

What does that look like in practice? Natura’s entire approach to the global pandemic was a case in point. [Its CEO] João Paulo and his team’s solutions for the crisis looked at the needs of the business and the community from multiple angles, restoring revenues while simultaneously taking care of employees, sales reps, the communities in which they operate, and beyond.

Business had been severely disrupted, with 90% of stores closed worldwide and major restrictions on production and distribution. Yet every action step was taken to not just ensure the physical safety of employees and sales reps but also to boost morale while keeping the wheels of the business moving, hiring and ramping up production activity to quickly meet new areas of demand.

Natura &Co’s first priority was to help its direct-to-consumer, relationship-driven salesforce—enough people to populate a large city—navigate the situation. So the group rolled out a “Time to Care" initiative. At the height of the uncertainty, employees were invited to pledge part of their pay on a voluntary basis, to help tackle the crisis and ensure continuity of activities. Thanks to Natura &Co’s impressive financial results, the group returned the donations at the end of 2020.

The move was not just good for the Natura community but also for business overall. Sales volume increased to the point where Natura had to repurpose a vacant warehouse into a distribution center. Those who could work remotely were sent home, no one was fired, and, again, the leadership went to great lengths to protect factory employees, swiftly repurposed its manufacturing to increase production by 30% to meet the shifts in consumer demand. The company also offered credit flexibility to the network of consultants and representatives, with payment terms and additional emergency funds. Employees, franchisees, consultants, and representatives also had access to telemedicine, mental health resources, and grief support, and have been encouraged to maintain connections with their colleagues, friends, and family.

Again, João Paulo didn’t just come at the problem from one direction. He carefully designed a considered, multilevel approach to a major global threat that spanned various aspects of the business and connected viscerally with stakeholders.

Source: Sustainable Leadership, Russell Reynolds Associates, 2021

Authors

Dana Landis

San Francisco

David Lange

Chicago

Shannon Knott

Atlanta

Erin Zolna

New York

Leadership Portrait

How can organizations understand and unlock senior executive potential?

Explore other critical Leadership Skills

Article

Featured
8 min read

Fight or Flight: The Leaders Who Emerge Stronger From Setbacks

Assessment and Benchmarking

Article

Featured
8 min read

Think Leaders Need All the Answers? Think Again

Assessment and Benchmarking

Article

Featured
8 min read

Walking the Stakeholder Tightrope: The Key to Effective Leadership

Assessment and Benchmarking

View All

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Ready to start your FUTURE-READY LEADERSHIP journey?

Speak to a consultant

The Future of Leadership

The world is changing. Here’s how leadership needs to change with it

Learn more

How can organizations identify leaders who are both adept at predicting and preparing for change and keeping their organization steady?

Discover how

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices