Power Dynamics on Boards | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Power Dynamics on Boards

LeadershipHuman Resources OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

January 16, 2025

6 min

LeadershipHuman Resources OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Understanding power dynamics on boards is crucial for effective governance, impacting decision-making, and organizational performance.

Close

The interplay of power and social influence among board directors impacts how decisions are made. Understanding how power runs through boardrooms and managing power dynamics is vital for good governance and sound decision-making.

In a corporate setting, every professional relationship is a delicate dance of power and influence.

On boards, power dynamics present a specific challenge. Pockets of power impact effective decision-making and governance. Understanding the psychology of power, or how the balance of power dynamics plays out on your board, is a vital skill for non-executive directors.

Power is the capacity of someone to control the actions or resources of another and is accrued through social influence. In a professional context, power and influence can be shown through control of strategy knowledge, finances or networks. The greater one’s social influence, the more likely peers and reports will award them power. This may present as hierarchy and responsibilities, or through an ability to direct decision making, as shown in the box, “Psychology of Power”.

Impact on governance

How does understanding power dynamics impact decision-making at the board level and thus on organisational performance? Consider the following:

Agenda setting: Individuals with greater influence or power may be able to drive agendas, prioritise issues, or detract from essential topics. While power often sits with the chair through the legitimacy of title (legitimate power), directors with alternate forms of influence, such as social networks, can exert greater influence and shape decision-making.

Decision control: Individuals or subgroups with more influence or power may sway the decision making process to align with personal interests. In turn, decisions reflecting the perspectives of those with dominant power may silence dissenting voices, risking groupthink or poor strategic outcomes.

Information access: Leveraging resources by retaining critical knowledge is a power mechanism. Information flows through boards in a “T”-like formation. It is both drawn up through the executive body and shared laterally between non-executive director peers. The unequal distribution of disclosed information hampers directors’ ability to effectively challenge decisions or provide meaningful input, thereby diminishing the effectiveness and influence of non-executive directors.

Resource allocation: Control over resources is classic avenue for influence. For example, reward power may be utilised through remuneration committees, impacting the retention and calibre of talent. An ability to mobilise and allocate key resources builds influence, power and control.

Group dynamics: Interpersonal dynamics (referent power) influence process. Strong power differentials seen in coercive, reward, legitimate or expert power discourage open dialogue and alternative viewpoints. Non-executive directors may feel pressured to align with the more powerful members.

Network dynamics: Interconnectivity between board members is a key consideration in any risk culture review. Dissection of social connectivity and appointment processes can shed light on power dynamics and potential risk within the group. Network dynamics are fluid and may change rapidly depending on the circumstance.

Psychology of Power

French and Raven’s (1959) Five Bases of Power is often used by consultants and psychologists when decoding how power presents in workplaces. These forms of power – legitimate, reward, coercive, referent and expert – are typically divided into formal and informal power types.

Formal

Legitimate power: Derived from a formal position or authority, it supports the belief that certain individuals have the right to make decisions and exert influence due to their rank or title.

Reward power: The ability to offer rewards, incentives or benefits, leveraging control over valued resources (e.g. promotions and recognition) to influence and motivate others.

Coercive power: With a capacity to administer punishment, some may use disciplinary actions or withdrawal of privileges to influence others through fear or apprehension.

Informal

Referent power: Influence stemming from admiration, respect or a sense of identification with an individual, often due to their personal qualities, characteristics or charisma. Colleagues with referent power are typically influential because they are likeable and inspire others to emulate or support them.

Expert power: Authority derived from the perception that someone has specialized knowledge or skills, establishing them as credible and trustworthy sources of information or guidance.

While some directors or executives strategically seek to accrue power  legitimate, reward, coercive), others are awarded power by peers in recognition of their perceived qualities (referent, expert).

Managing power dynamics on boards

When reviewing power dynamics on your board, the following imbalances could be red flags.

First, a pattern of conformity or suppression of dissenting opinions in cohesive groups could be an indication of groupthink. It may be unintentional, and board members may fail to critically analyse alternate views, especially if high-power individuals take an early position and close deliberation processes. Groupthink can result in limited options being discussed, resulting in sub-optimal outcomes. If pockets of mastery on key topics exist, consider having all directors come to meetings with a range of thoughts on topics outside their scope, presenting from least specialised to most. Encourage everyone to have a view.

Second, people behave differently depending on their social or professional roles. Boards are designed to be flat hierarchies of accomplished and connected peers.

A push-pull effect between personal and professional identities can create decision-making tension, particularly in circumstances where board dynamics can be influenced by expert, legitimate or referent power. Boards can consider appointing a member with high referent power to play devil’s advocate and encourage challenge.

Third, emotional quotient (EQ) is an ability to recognise, understand, manage and influence your own emotions and the emotions of others. Board members with well-developed EQ may be more aware of interpersonal power dynamics, and skilled at navigating social complexities. Boards can leverage psychometric assessments, performance appraisals, 360 interviews and reference checks to understand the EQ of their members in their evaluation process.

Fourth, cognitive diversity enhances decision making processes. Board diversity is achieved by intentionally selecting members who bring a point of difference through their experience, skill sets, gender,socioeconomic status, ethnicity, education, profession, age, sexuality, religion, or disability. The board composition should be reviewed to meet the desired skills matrix for the intended strategy of the company.

Finally, the concept of trust is a tricky one for boards. Directors need to be able to balance trust and professional scepticism. Disclosure, therefore, becomes a key tool to manage this. A robust disclosure regime supports the necessary information flow between management, the board and stakeholders, and to an extent helps equalize information asymmetry. From an ethical perspective, this transparency also allows for recognising and subsequently managing conflicts of interest.

Undercurrents of power have a critical effect on the psychological safety of board directors. Psychological safety is the belief that an individual can express an opinion or take a risk without fear of negative personal consequences. It is a faith in the ability to share ideas, ask probing questions, raise concerns, make errors and seek honest feedback without consequence.

Boards which are psychologically safe are more likely to pre-empt and adapt to industry changes, respond positively to challenges, encourage innovation from their executives, and have more complete oversight of operations as executives are less inclined to gloss over or omit negative outcomes.

Understanding and managing power dynamics on boards is crucial for good governance and effective decision-making. Good governance is more than transactional or strategic skills. The ability to influence, understand the unsaid and read between the lines is vital to effective and ethical corporate governance.

The interplay of power and social influence among board directors impacts where attention is focused, how decisions are made, and ultimately the priorities of the management team. The psychology of power, including the different bases of power (legitimate, reward, coercive, referent and expert), plays a significant role in shaping board dynamics.

Power imbalances can impact agenda setting, decision control, information access, resource allocation, group dynamics and network dynamics, affecting the overall governance of an organisation. To manage power dynamics effectively, directors will need to address issues such as groupthink, personal-professional identity conflicts, emotional intelligence, board diversity, transparency, accountability, disclosure and psychosocial safety.

Ultimately, good governance is the ability to navigate with ethical integrity through the shadows cast by power interplays. By recognising and mitigating power imbalances, boards can foster a culture of trust, psychological safety and inclusive decision making, leading to improved organisational performance and resilience.

Alvin Chiang is a consultant at Russell Reynolds Associates and Arabella Steel is a leadership and culture specialist.

This article was first published in the Q1 2025 issue of the SID Directors Bulletin by the Singapore Institute of Directors.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices