Board Leadership in an Era of Upheaval | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Board Leadership in an Era of Upheaval

Leadership StrategiesBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

+ 1 author

May 08, 2025

4 min

Leadership StrategiesBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Boards should focus on elevating communications and ensuring they balance crisis management with a focus on the long-term.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Justus O’Brien

Stamford

Laura Sanderson

London

David Finke

Palo Alto

Recent tariff announcements by the United States—and ensuing trade tensions and market volatility—have triggered waves of both activity and uncertainty in executive suites and boardrooms. Companies are now grappling with policy volatility, inflationary concerns, and geopolitical instability on top of the existing challenges of artificial intelligence and other forms of disruptive innovation, and growing stakeholder pressure on a variety of business and social issues.  Significant downturns in the equity markets are only adding to the difficulty.

In a recent interview on CNBC, Delta Airlines CEO Ed Bastian remarked at how “we’re in uncharted, unprecedented, uncertainty,” adding that these pivots were a “self-inflicted situation.” He went on to note that “whether you’re a corporate manager trying to figure out whether you want to step forward on an investment, whether you’re a bond trader in the markets trying to allocate capital, or even as a consumer, I think everything has stalled. So there’s been a freeze. Until we get better clarity […] I think our economy is going to continue to lose steam.”

For global enterprises, the difficulties multiply. Critical issues such as sustainability, technology, and governance are being viewed and regulated in diametrically opposite manners across markets. Directors and executives in these companies can’t move in any direction without risking backlash from governments and stakeholders in certain regions, but will likely also generate criticism from within for not making potentially unpopular moves that have the support of the workforce.

Anthony Capuano, CEO of Marriott International, spoke to Fortune about his experience the day the US federal government issued guidance restricting practices. Asked about the company’s position on the matter during eight interviews that day, Capuano remarked that, “I thought about what I'd heard from Bill Marriott all these decades. And what I said in response to those questions was, ‘we've been around for almost a century. Political winds blow all different directions, particularly when you operate in almost 150 countries. But there are some fundamental truths about this company that have guided us for those 98 years: We welcome all to our hotels and we create opportunity for all. And fundamentally, those will never change. The words might change, but that's who we are as a company.’”  Over the next 24 hours, Capuano received 40,000 emails from Marriott employees thanking him for taking the position and clearly stating it to the public.

Moment such as these are real tests of both board and leadership effectiveness.  The most effective boards will engage deeply on critical issues, and strive to support without distracting their management teams.  Ultimately, in this climate, boards face the challenge of maintaining stability while positioning their organizations for long-term success in a rapidly evolving landscape.

Based on our experience, and guidance from experienced board leaders, here are eight pieces of practical guidance for navigating our current era:

First and foremost, remain focused on your people and your purpose:

1. Center on purpose: In the race to confront new challenges, many leaders will naturally succumb to the tendency to focus on the urgent in spite of the important. In these situations, the board plays a particularly critical role in keeping purpose at the center. Review major decisions through the lens of organizational purpose, ensuring that any steps your company takes to address the current period of disruption aligns with the company's reason for being, the customers and stakeholders they serve, and the value they provide in the market. Taking steps now that don’t align with your purpose simply trades a problem today for a problem tomorrow.

2. Model values-based leadership: Culture is an asset in a volatile world. Demonstrate unwavering commitment to the firm’s mission, vision, and core values in board deliberations and communications, particularly when facing difficult trade-offs. Be courageous. Care for your management team—they are feeling the weight of this disruption and of any problems your company faces far more than you are as a director. Encourage senior leaders to delegate what they can in order to remain focused on the most important issues without becoming overwhelmed. Similarly, encourage them to consider what steps they can take to support the workforce, especially as supply disruptions and tariffs disproportionally impact lower-income workers.

3. Reassess your leadership bench: Market disruption often reveals both weaknesses and strengths in leadership ranks. Note which executives demonstrate resilience and strategic thinking under pressure versus those who struggle to adapt. Consider what this moment reveals about your leadership team – some unexpected individuals will have likely stepped up, while some leaders you expected to excel will have stumbled. It is unlikely that your succession plan will still look the same after an extended period of crisis or disruption.

Balance risk and reactivity:

4. Resist short-term thinking and maintain forward-looking agendas: Short-termism spikes in moments of volatility and uncertainty. Board leaders can help counter this by ensuring that board meeting agendas balance immediate risk management with strategic discussions focused on long-term competitive positioning. Decisions need to be made that stand the test of time, not just this moment in time. Dedicating specific time in each meeting to exploring these opportunities can help fellow directors stay focused on the long-term.

5. Challenge management's level of reactivity: One CEO we spoke to reflected that they spent three weekends in a row working to respond to new crises that came into existence on a Friday but were gone by Monday. Board leaders need to encourage executives to be responsive but selective. Not every action requires an immediate reaction, and a tendency to react immediately rather than strategically will produce an exhausted leadership team (and broader organization). That said, boards should encourage executives to elevate their analysis, identifying ways in which the current market turbulence has fundamentally shifted business operations, which changes are temporary, and what steps should the company be taking in response.

Address today’s challenges while remaining focused on the future:

6. Encourage the management team to play offense and defense: The most significant shifts in competitive rankings often occur during periods of uncertainty and disruption. The board should support and encourage the senior executive team to assess where competitors may be vulnerable and how your organization can gain strategic advantage. In periods of disruption, it’s easy to fall into a pattern of defensive, reactive activities. Encourage your leadership team to look up and out for opportunities to play offense while your competitors take a more defensive posture. Ask members of the management team where they see both small and large moves that will help the organization remain competitive.

Maintain clear channels of communication:

7. Communicate and offer to assist often (but within reason): Both board leaders and senior executives should strive to increase the frequency and depth of communication between the board and management during periods of market turbulence. Board leaders may consider increasing the frequency of their meetings, and they wouldn’t be alone: one chair told us their board was now meeting weekly, reminiscent of how they worked at the height of COVID in 2020.  That cadence will feel right for some boards, and too frequent for others; what matters is finding the right pace for your organization. Remember that while boards and CEOs can’t over communicate in volatile times, too many requests for updates and briefings will overwhelm a management team that is already operating under significant pressure and time constraints. As one director memorably shared with us, “it’s not helpful when too many helpful directors are trying to be helpful.”

8. Be open about challenges—and the path ahead: Boards and executive teams should collaborate to craft and articulate a clear, compelling narrative about the company’s response to current challenges and it’s vision for emerging stronger in the end. Ensure communications with stakeholders are candid about challenges while conveying confidence in the organization's resilience. The board and management should be thoughtful as to who engages with which stakeholders, identifying those who should hear from both board leaders and management together.

Governing for resilience and growth

The unprecedented challenges leaders are facing today can make or break organizations. By remaining focused on your people and your purpose, balancing risk and reactivity, addressing today’s challenges while remaining focused on the future, and maintaining clear channels of communication, directors can help steer their senior executives through the near-term disruption and toward a successful future.

Authors

Rusty O’Kelley co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners practice. He is based in Miami.
Todd Safferstone leads RRA’s Strategy & Excellence function. He is based in New York.
Laura Sanderson co-leads the firm’s operations in Europe, Middle East and India. She is based in London.
Justus O’Brien leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Family Enterprise Advisory practice. He is based in Stamford.
David Finke is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners and technology practices. He is based in Palo Alto.
PJ Neal is the Global Head of Operations for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners and Family Enterprise Advisory practices.  He is based in Boston.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices