CEO Succession in Family Enterprises: Don’t Wait for the Night Before Noon  | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CEO Succession in Family Enterprises: Don’t Wait for the Night Before Noon

Family EnterpriseCEO Succession

Article

January 22, 2025

7 min

Family EnterpriseCEO Succession

Executive Summary

It’s never too soon to think about your future leadership. After all, effective CEO succession takes time. That means starting the process now.

Close

Shawn Cooper

Toronto

Sanjay Kapoor

New Delhi
Mumbai

Justus O’Brien

Stamford

How did it get so late so soon? It's night before noon and December before June. My goodness how the time has flewn.”

— Dr. Seuss

As a CEO of a family enterprise, you have poured your heart and soul into helping the business succeed.

It's hard to imagine anyone understanding the organization the way you do, let alone being able to step into  your shoes. But there is no escaping the fact that someday a new generation of leaders will need to take the helm.

Choosing your next CEO is one of the most important decisions your family enterprise will make. No decision will have a bigger impact on the performance of your business and its enduring legacy.

But effective leadership succession takes time. As Dr. Seuss reminds us, it’s never too soon to think about your future leadership. That means starting the process now.

The succession planning challenge in family enterprises

Unfortunately, many family enterprises overlook the need for a well-thought-out succession strategy and, in turn, aren't prepared for one of the most critical transitions they'll ever face. Our research, for example, found that 42% of family enterprise leaders globally describe their succession practices as informal, while 32% admit their approach is reactive rather than proactive.

The reasons for this succession planning gap are complex. Of course, there's the day-to-day reality of running a business. Market pressures, operational challenges, and growth opportunities demand a CEO’s immediate attention. Succession planning, by contrast, feels like tomorrow's problem. There's always another crisis to manage, another opportunity to seize.

There are other barriers, too. Not only will you, the sitting CEO, likely have deep emotional ties to the business—even more so if you are a family member—but you are also responsible for navigating complex family dynamics inherent in leadership transitions. You will need to manage tensions that surface between potential internal successors—as well as those that arise if you choose to look externally. It’s understandable why many CEOs choose to delay.

But delaying succession planning isn't just risky—it can undermine your business's long-term success. Leadership transitions are complex, demanding processes that require years, not months, to execute properly. Starting early isn't just about being prepared; it's about creating options.

Think of succession planning like developing a new product line or entering a new market. You wouldn't wait until the last minute to begin such crucial initiatives. You'd research, plan, test, and refine. Succession deserves the same strategic approach.

By planning early, it enables you to identify and develop multiple potential candidates from both within and outside of the family, creating a diverse leadership pipeline. If you are appointing internally, you then have the luxury of time to test and refine those leaders’ capabilities in lower-stakes environments. This strategic approach not only builds stakeholder confidence in the succession process but also allows organizations to methodically address any knowledge or experience gaps, ensuring a smooth leadership transition.

Hear Justus O’Brien, global leader of our family enterprise advisory practice, explain the importance of starting CEO succession early—and how preparation pays dividends.

The top five CEO succession planning best practices

01

Start the process of succession planning now

That’s because CEO succession is a long-term undertaking. To find (and prepare) the right person to lead your family enterprise into the future, it’s important to lay the right foundations, including gaining alignment on your needs, guidelines, and processes. For this, the board needs to be aligned on a forward-looking leadership profile which will inform the selection and development of candidates.

02

Cast your net

The goal of your succession planning process is to highlight a pipeline of high-performing internal talent that will be able to sustain your company for years to come. But you shouldn’t rule out external candidates completely. While internal candidates tend to be stronger in terms of cultural fit and values, external candidates can offer different skill sets and a fresh perspective. The key is to assess (and benchmark) the best leader for your business—both at its particular stage and for the future.

03

Don’t shy away from addressing sensitivities

Nobody wants to think about the person who will inevitably replace them—particularly in a family enterprise. But, for the wellbeing of your business, the question has to be asked. The best succession plans are ones where boards and sitting CEOs are able to come together constructively to plan, measure performance, set projections for the future, and mentor future leadership candidates.

04

Set your CEO succession process up for success

Define your core culture and values
Start by clearly articulating what makes your family business unique. Document your founding principles, family values, and the cultural elements that have driven your success. Understanding your cultural DNA helps ensure that succession planning preserves what matters most while allowing for necessary evolution. Involve multiple generations in this process to create shared ownership of the company's future identity.

Set clear criteria that match your company’s current—and future—needs
Ensure there is alignment between all key stakeholders and decision-makers on what your next leader should look like. While family ties are important, you will need to establish clear merit-based criteria. This will help you create a Success Profile: a blueprint of the skills and traits your next CEO will need. Then, look inside your organization and ask yourself: “Does anyone have the potential to develop into our next CEO?” Aligning stakeholders can be particularly complex in family enterprises. Independent advisors can help you facilitate difficult conversations and resolve conflicts.

Establish clear timeframes, with short-term milestones and long-term goals
You should expect to invest five years on average to train internal candidates. Add in search time and onboarding, and each CEO succession process cycle could take anywhere from 7 to 10 years, from beginning to onboarding.

Devise a thorough assessment process that identifies leadership potential and development needs
A good process will help determine which candidates have the potential to be strong future leaders. It’s important to test all candidates equally against the same criteria, covering temperament, mindset, knowledge, and other relevant areas. Generally, we recommend focusing more on skills and traits rather than existing C-level experience. Our approach to assessment and development begins with a Leadership Portrait, which describes who your leaders are today—and what their potential is for becoming great leaders tomorrow.

Invest in ongoing development for internal candidates
This might include formal education, external work experience, and structured rotation through different business areas. Consider implementing a mentoring program where internal or external leaders can share knowledge and experience with potential successors. Encourage next-generation leaders to develop their own vision for the company's future while respecting its core values—this balance of innovation and tradition can be a powerful driver of growth.

Create development plans for candidates not chosen for the CEO path
Not everyone who you consider for the CEO role will be successful. But that doesn’t mean that they aren’t valuable talent that deserves to be developed and given solid progression opportunities, nonetheless. So, ensure you build parallel development paths for the candidates not chosen for the CEO succession path, so that they feel supported, appreciated, and like they have clear opportunities for success. And even if they’re not ready for immediate succession, they may still turn into strong candidates for future succession cycles.

Safeguard the business with a crisis plan for emergency situations
Succession plans are often developed with a specific timeline in mind; but sometimes emergency situations occur, and a CEO needs to be replaced ahead of schedule. As an ongoing, living effort, the succession planning process is invaluable for having materials ready and candidates identified in those situations, and for having a common language and mindset about what matters most for your company's next leader.

Continuously monitor and improve
Even after the new CEO is selected and onboarded, there’s still work to be done. The board will need to work out what success looks like in the CEO’s first year (which isn't necessarily financial metrics). They will also need to conduct a thorough post-mortem of the succession process to note what went well, what could be improved, and whether anything in the Success Profile needs to be amended or updated going forward.

05

Partner with an experienced leadership and search advisory firm

CEO succession isn’t an everyday occurrence. Even the most experienced of board members will only have gone through two or three CEO successions over the course of their careers. At the same time, appointing a CEO is probably the most pivotal decision you face—and it has lasting implications for your company’s performance and its place in the world.

Engaging advisors who can provide inside and outside perspectives and wise counsel to guide you through the process can set you up for success and ensure you not only find the best fit for now—but that your company is ready for the future. Backed by 50 years of experience, we truly understand the nuances of succession planning in family enterprises, with advice that reflects your current stage of growth (e.g. founder-led, multi-generation, or externally run). And once you’ve made your selection, we can also ready your candidates for the top job, with tailored mentoring and transition support.

The time is now

Every family enterprise faces the succession challenge. The key is to start planning early, be methodical, and create a process that serves both the family's and the business's interests.

Leadership succession isn't something that happens to you—it's something you deliberately, strategically create. Your business's future success depends on the groundwork you lay today.

Don't wait for the night before noon. Start now.

Authors

Shawn Cooper

Sanjay Kapoor

Justus O’Brien

Family Enterprise Insights

Article

Michelle Mion

Featured
7 min read

The Key to Family Enterprise Success: Don’t Leave Leadership Development to Chance

Family EnterpriseAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

Featured
7 min read

How Can Family Enterprises Integrate External CEOs While Preserving Their Culture?

Family EnterpriseExecutive SearchCulture Analytics

Article

Featured
7 min read

How Can You Effectively Manage Underperforming Leaders in Family Enterprises?

Family EnterpriseAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

Featured
7 min read

The Tradition Trap: How Family Enterprises Can Balance Legacy and Innovation

Technology and InnovationSustainable LeadershipTransformation and InnovationFamily Enterprise

Article

Featured
7 min read

When’s The Right Time For Family Enterprise Boards to Appoint Independent Directors?

Family EnterpriseBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

View All

CONNECT WITH OUR FAMILY ENTERPRISE TEAM

Speak to a consultant

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices