Microsoft’s Vijay Mital explains how CEOs can guide their organizations through radical product innovation with AI | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Microsoft’s Vijay Mital Explains How CEOs Can Guide Their Organizations Through Radical Product Innovation with AI

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

Fawad Bajwa

November 14, 2024

12 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

AI can drive radical product innovation, transforming business models and industries. To unlock this opportunity, CEOs must lead with vision and curiosity.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

What your company can achieve from GenAI is only limited by its ambition. With the right effort, AI can change how companies create new products that can transform business models and markets—and even society. Here are our learnings from such journeys.

Fawad Bajwa
Russell Reynolds Associates

As a CEO, you galvanize your organization around a shared vision of progress. But with AI changing the opportunity landscape beyond recognition, you are faced with some big questions. When it comes to GenAI, most CEOs recognize by now that this technology is powerful, and organizations are already using it in multiple ways across their functions. So what can the CEO prioritize and uniquely champion, fully capitalizing on these emerging capabilities?

As CEOs look to put their weight behind a few big bets that were previously unimaginable, the area receiving particular attention should be one in which they already have ideas and major ambition, but were held back by the difficulty of implementing with their existing base of people, assets and relationships. What earlier might have looked like moonshots are now coming within execution reach by a combination of GenAI advances and the creativity and culture change leadership from the highest levels.

In this discussion, Vijay Mital, Corporate Vice President & Chief Advisor for AI Transformation at Microsoft Research, shares his learnings from a decades-long career in software, and over 20 years at Microsoft, including the last five years partnering with senior leaders at companies on envisioning and applying GenAI to effect radical product innovation.

If you want to get going on this journey—and want to make some timely leaps for your company – this post may offer you a blueprint for doing just that.

What is radical product innovation?

Vijay Mital
Microsoft

It is best to start with a couple of synthesized examples.

Take a cosmetics company that seeks to move beyond products that make people look good, to products with verifiable wellness claims. That requires understanding not just chemistry but biochemistry, and interpreting a whole spectrum of scientific literature, lab results and raw consumer signals.

This is product innovation. It becomes radical product innovation if the cosmetics company can deliver this more complex, new product with its current research personnel, its existing data assets and at its current speed, i.e., the speed of consumer trends and tastes.

Take a reinsurance company that seeks to expand its portfolio of commercial operations with heavy exposure to environmental risk. Take one such operation, a sprawling dairy facility.

The underwriter needs to understand the type of equipment being used, and the site in which it is situated. This means interpreting satellite imagery as well as subterranean signals like ground penetrating radar. Then correlating the signals with reports of previous spills around the world and the containment efforts that were needed to prevent aquifers or nearby farming and exurban populations from being affected.

This new offering becomes a radical product innovation if the reinsurer can act on this complex information across varying types of environmental risks in diverse geolocations, upleveling and amplifying existing people and skill sets.

The product ideas don’t have to be new. In fact, they are often long-held but suppressed aspirations. What is new is the potential with GenAI to actually deliver these products at reasonable cost and at scale from an existing base of people and assets.

Once a product innovation is this radical, it opens the opportunity to change the business model, and ecosystem and market dynamics.

Cosmetics with strong wellness claims can attract new types of therapists, beauticians and fashion influencers. The ability to differentiate environmental risks can allow the insurer to become more of a partner as a company decides to locate and configure new dairy operations.

I have learnt that CEOs and senior leadership are strong at identifying such opportunities in their markets. What holds them back sometimes is the difficulty of delivering on these opportunities with their current expertise, asset base and market position. GenAI can change this.

What are your key learnings?

My learnings here started in 2019, when it first became clear to many companies that large language models (then called Foundation Models) were on a path to interpret the kinds of complex information that researchers and product innovators have to reason over, such as literature, charts and free flowing observations.

This allowed us to shift the use of AI from narrowly defined applications to broad acceleration and transformation of complex, high-stakes processes—essentially playing three roles:

A Reasoning Engine: Read all types of information and signals and connect the dots.

A Teaching Engine: Learn the methodologies and techniques that worked in the past, and now transfer them and adapt them for current tasks within current resource constraints.

A Process Evolution Engine: Let people break artificial discipline and role boundaries that were enshrined in traditional application UIs. Using a conversational interface, a product formulator can look into upstream research results that were discarded and use that to optimize downstream tasks.

This gave senior leaders a simple lens on GenAI. Given this, I saw the following loose pattern succeed. For simplicity, I have formulated it as a step-by-step guide, but of course not all steps were always needed or executed in this sequence.

1. Locate your highest-reward areas
Every company has an understanding of their value chain and what improvements bring returns. For example, in pharma, if a 10% R&D cost reduction means a 1x multiple on return, then a 10% reduction in risk of experiments and trials succeeding has a 24x return, while bringing peak sales forward has a 36x return.

Given the uncertainties and difficulties in product innovation, not to mention the effort to get GenAI right and adopted by the most creative experts, it’s natural that leaders opt to target processes with the highest multiple. With this high reward potential, it becomes easier to define interim delivery and milestones where even a partial success is valuable.

2. Create early measures that help both the business and data scientists
Identify metrics you can measure even early in the product innovation journey. The best metrics are those that are valuable both to a business owner and to data scientists.

One example of such a metric is information coverage. How many sources of information did the decision maker take into account? Did they learn from previous focus groups, or social postings by consumers, or experiments in adjacent product lines? Often, high information coverage in critical decisions is a proxy for risk reduction. This is a business metric: reduction of risk of late failures, thus acceleration of getting product to market. It is also a metric that data scientists can tune the AI on.

With GenAI, for the first time, we have systems that can continually improve – provided they are told what being better means!

3. Bring in multiple business owners from day one
Traditionally, software projects like focusing on one defined problem or process at a time. Easy to manage, easy to measure. Instead, perhaps counterintuitively, what we saw succeed is a “foundational” approach: work on multiple product innovations at the same time, let the AI core learn from different types of information and different types of users. That created a robust base with sufficient flexibility to let people discover new ways of working and stretch artificial boundaries.

4. Empower champion users to share their reasoning and create trails for others
It took a long while for enterprises to become data-driven. Multiple years to move people from relying on hunches or private knowledge to using tools like spreadsheets, data lakes and business intelligence effectively. With GenAI, we are asking people to move from data-driven to learning-driven: how did others solve an analogous problem, what was different, and how to adapt that learning for my own situation.

Even with the best implementation of GenAI, there is a learning curve—not a UI learning curve, because everyone can talk to a bot, but a reasoning learning curve. How to pose questions, how to break them down into pieces that can be cross-checked by a colleague, how to bring existing tools like evaluators and predictors into the reasoning. The key is the observation that a small percentage of people always figure this out really fast—and what accelerates everyone else is if these champions can easily and safely share their reasoning chains, their methodology as templates for others.

5. Learn to start from a low-data environment and create a robust data estate
Radical product innovation often means that a company is going into an area where they do not have as much data as they have for traditional product lines or service lines. The reinsurer above does not already have a large dataset on environmental inspections, claims, damage mitigation and dispute resolutions. The cosmetics company can’t build on a body of existing focus group reports and influencer videos from people who have already tried products with both beauty and wellness claims.

What we saw succeed was a two-pronged approach. In one prong, get value where few-shot learning works, i.e, give Large Language Models or Large Multimodal Models (both called LLMs) a small number of carefully chosen and commented examples and let the LLMs use their pre-training and world knowledge to generalize. Interestingly, recent advances in LLMs, like GPT o1’s delivery of PhD level reasoning, will make this generalization even more powerful.

In the second, identify those types of data gaps that can be filled with data synthesis. Sometimes, LLMs themselves can add missing attributes or generate new hypothetical scenarios and case studies. At other times, and this technique is still emerging, simulators and emulators can create variations of existing data or generate entirely new records.

The important part was a very deliberate exercise of creating a data estate, with an understanding of what gaps LLMs can fill and what data can be synthesized by other computational methods, before resorting to manually gathering or licensing new data.

What is the CEO’s role in ensuring innovation?

GenAI is a very significant technology breakthrough. But it is not the first technology that companies have used to radically transform their products, or change their ecosystems and markets, or even benefit society.

Let’s go back to the dawn of the internet. At that time, perhaps the most radical product innovation I saw was in heavy industry, from generators to recycling plants to gas turbines. Seemingly overnight, the industry became decentralized and asset light. Logistics providers could offer services in far flung locations without adding people and facilities. Small manufacturers could now become prime contractors by the ability to co-opt engineers spread across the global supply chain, each an expert on a component of the overall solution. These internet-native companies created value for themselves and also achieved a substantial shift in industry and society as a whole.

In the cloud plus mobile era, it was e-commerce companies who completely reimagined the relationship between products and people. From how desire and demand was created, to the act of browsing and selecting, to increasingly rapid delivery, and even continuous delivery on a subscription model.

Clearly, the idea of CEOs and senior leaders seeing new technology as a way to create radically new products and services is not new. In fact, we could say that encouraging and effecting such a change is senior leaders’ most important job. What is different with GenAI is that for the first time we have the ability to deal with complexities of information, expertise and reasoning that no previous era of technology was able to. This means that it can reach into almost every R&D process and every customer signal channel for every type of product. Now, the opportunity spectrum is wider, which is why it becomes even more of a CEO concern.

It’s not about pivoting to an entirely unknown business, but rather leveraging existing technical know-how, people, distribution chains and data to then apply a radical product innovation approach.

Every CEO is inundated with a thousand ideas to improve their business strategy. So how do you know what to focus on?

Radical product innovation may well be the biggest tool at your disposal—if you want to think big and pull the biggest lever for your business, then it’s a great way to transform and leverage what you already have. This means you can benefit from your existing place in the market and launch into a new era.

But it’s only possible through leadership that creates a culture of curiosity and innovation. As I saw AI shift to more high-stakes processes, I also saw senior leaders celebrate experimentation. As new AI capabilities came in, some at an immature stage, users discovered them and brought them into their reasoning flows with care, often cross-checking them against prior models and other ground truth. In other words, as always, more than technology, it is about ambition, leadership and culture.

RRA’s Systems View on Leading Through AI Transformation

By Fawad Bajwa, Global AI, Analytics, and Data Practice Leader, Russell Reynolds Associates

Ultimately, unlocking the benefits of AI, such as radical product innovation, requires visionary leadership—whether you are a tech leader, C-suite executive, or CEO.

The most powerful approach to transformation equips the entire organization with the tools and leadership to drive change across the business at every level. It involves four key areas:

Reimagine the business. Now is the time for radical change, rather than simply upgrading the edges of your business. Scenario plan for how AI connects to their broader business transformation, and use that to imagine an AI-enabled future over a long term horizon, with radical product innovation.

CEO enablement. While CEOs need to lead the AI charge, they also need to work with leaders throughout the organization who understand AI, and build a cabinet of advisors around them—from technology experts, to board directors and consultants.

C-suite redesign. First, design a future-facing success profile for every function and role. Then, assess your current capabilities against your needs of the future. Finally, encourage each function to support other functions in their missions, and underpin them all with technology/digital capabilities.

Board composition. It’s good practice to appoint an AI systems thinker with relevant industry context, while also accelerating upskilling and AI training for existing board members. Aim for strategic and technological balance, not over-indexing on tech visionaries who can’t also bring business experience.

AI enablement. It’s critical to centralize your data infrastructure and elevate your approach to data governance. Then you are ready to build your AI capability and innovate around agreed use cases. In turn, this will help maximize any partnerships with AI platforms—to dramatically scale your impact.

Authors

Vijay Mital,
Microsoft
Fawad Bajwa,
Russell Reynolds Associates

At Russell Reynolds, we’re on a mission to understand how AI will transform leadership

This blog is part of a series to uncover the AI essentials for business and offer a blueprint for big ideas.

Join the conversation

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices