Unlocking SaaS CFO Talent in a Tight Market | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Unlocking SaaS CFO Talent in a Tight Market

Portfolio Company LeadershipFinance OfficersExecutive Search

Article

February 18, 2025

4 min

Portfolio Company LeadershipFinance OfficersExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Experienced SaaS CFOs are in high demand, get strategic to unlock talent.

Close

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Nick Roberts

San Francisco

Demand for experienced software and SaaS CFOs in sponsor-backed companies continues to be highly competitive. Since 2023, 82% of SaaS CFOs recruited to portfolio companies had prior CFO experience. Just two years ago, this number was only 64%.

In a market where many companies are rebalancing toward profitability in addition to growth,1  sponsors are re-evaluating their portfolio finance talent and showing reluctance towards hiring a first-time CFO. Due to this—along with lower deal volume and fewer recent exits (Figure 1)—the addressable pool of SaaS CFO talent has become much more competitive    .

Figure 1: YoY US SaaS PE Deals and Exits (2014-2024)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Pitchbook analysis of private equity SaaS investments, deals, and exits, 2014-2024

To understand the state of the SaaS CFO market and unlock SaaS CFO talent in the face of tight competition, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed 140 US-based SaaS CFOs from sponsor-backed (PE and VC), and public organizations in the $100 million to $2 billion revenue range.

Our findings suggest the following:

SaaS organizations are overwhelmingly looking externally for their CFOs

Experienced SaaS CFOs are in high demand

Unlocking SaaS talent in a tight market requires a thoughtful approach

SaaS organizations are overwhelmingly looking externally for their  CFOs

While succession planning has paid off for the broader S&P 5002, SaaS organizations continue to hire the majority of their CFOs externally (Figure 2) . Within the S&P 500, 40% of CFOs come from outside the organization. However, 73% of public SaaS companies, 74% of PE-backed organizations, and 83% of VC-backed organizations hired external CFOs — making these organizations approximately twice as likely to look for external finance talent.

This, in addition to the demand for experienced CFOs (more on this below), has many SaaS organizations competing for talent in an already small market.

Figure 2: SaaS CFO internal promotion versus external hiring

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of 140 US public, PE-backed and VC-backed company CFOs in the $100M-$2B revenue range, 2024

Experienced SaaS CFOs are in high demand

Not only are SaaS organizations twice as likely to hire an experienced CFO than other S&P 500 organizations (Figure 3), but over the past two years, the number of SaaS organizations hiring veterans has increased substantially from 64% between 2020 and 2022 to 82% in 2023 and 2024 at PE-backed SaaS organizations.

Figure 3: Experienced vs first-time SaaS CFOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of 140 US public, PE-backed and VC-backed company CFOs in the $100M-$2B revenue range, 2024

As organizations look externally, many add demographic and experienced-based requirements to their list of must-haves. However, including too many popular “must-haves” can quickly shrink the available talent pool (Figure 4.)

Figure 4: SaaS CFO Demographics and Experience

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of 140 US public, PE-backed and VC-backed company CFOs in the $100M-$2B revenue range, 2024

Prior to stepping into the CFO role, SaaS finance talent overwhelmingly comes up the finance operations track (Figure 5), which includes experience in deputy/divisional CFO roles, EVP/SVP/VP finance roles, and FP&A.

However, the CFO’s route to the top differs slightly depending on the organization type. For example, both PE and VC-backed organizations are more likely to consider talent from investor backgrounds, given the emphasis placed on exit and sponsor experience.

Figure 5: Role prior to first SaaS CFO role

*Includes FP&A, VP finance, CFO, division/regional CFO | Source: Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of 140 US public, PE-backed and VC-backed company CFOs in the $100M-$2B revenue range, 2024

Unlocking SaaS talent in a tight market requires a thoughtful approach

With over 50% of SaaS CFOs turning over in the past three years, public company technology CFOs  departing their roles after an average of 5.9 years,2    and portfolio company CFOs departing after an average tenure of 2.5 years 5, few sitting CFOs are extractable (Figure  6).

Figure 6: SaaS CFO Tenure

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of 140 US public, PE-backed and VC-backed company CFOs in the $100M-$2B revenue range, 2024

And with CFOs retiring at age 58 on average, many of those who are extractable may not consider another CFO opportunity. What’s more, PE CFOs are even more resistant to opportunities as they wait for an exit, many of which have been delayed.

So with few experienced SaaS CFOs available, how can your organization unlock SaaS talent? We suggest the following tactics:

Invest in development

As many organizations are looking externally and competing for experienced finance talent, investing in assessing, developing, and mentoring talent within your finance organization and across portfolio companies is essential to unlocking the next generation of talent. Additionally, the right development and mentorship can provide confidence when appointing a step-up.

Get competitive about compensation

In a competitive market with many CFOs waiting to meet their liquidity event, compensation remains key to extracting seated talent—particularly as CFOs assess both VC and PE opportunities and the potential equity value.

Showcase the value of the sponsor

An organization’s value proposition is always important. But for private capital-backed organizations, the partnership with the sponsor can offer similar—or even greater—selling points for your prospective CFO. Differentiate your firm’s value by highlighting how it supports and partners with portfolio CFOs.

Align on the value proposition

Be clear about the organization’s value proposition, its strategy, and potential. Being open and transparent about key financial metrics and growth targets can help attract high-caliber candidates.

Be open on location

Relocation remains a significant impediment, as many people are unwilling to relocate. Being flexible on location will significantly expand the pool of experienced SaaS finance leaders.

Selectively consider first-time CFOs

As the market continues to be tight, considering and appropriately assessing first-time CFOs may help broaden your talent pool and offer an opportunity to access a more diverse slate of candidates.

References

Technology Report 2024 - Technology Industry Trends | Bain & Company

Global CFO Turnover Index: Q1-Q3 2024 S&P 500 By the Numbers | Russell Reynolds Associates

Russell Reynolds Associates Pitchbook analysis of private equity SaaS investments, deals, and exits, 2014- 2024

Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of 140 US public, PE-backed and VC-backed company CFOs in the $100M-$2B revenue range, 2024
5.	Russell Reynolds Associates analysis of 150 US portfolio company CFOs, 2024

How to Attract and Retain Portfolio CFOs in a Competitive Market | Russell Reynolds Associates

Authors

Jenna Fisher co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice globally. She is based in Palo Alto.
Nick Roberts is a partner of Russell Reynolds Associates Financial Officers practice. He is based in San Francisco.
Catherine Schroeder leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

Unlocking SaaS CFO Talent in a Tight Market

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices