Tomorrow’s Banking CEO:  Reframing Succession for the Future | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Tomorrow’s Banking CEO:  Charting Succession for the Future

Financial ServicesGlobal Banking and MarketsConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 5 authors

November 04, 2024

12 min

Financial ServicesGlobal Banking and MarketsConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

The evolving banking sector demands a multifaceted CEO to navigate growing complexity, yet finding such leaders is increasingly difficult.

Close

Nick Anderson

Hong Kong

Jane Bird

London

Shawn Cooper

Toronto

James Diggines

Singapore

Sean Dineen

Boston

Dee Symons

London

Mary-Caroline Tillman

New York

Beijing Zhu

Hong Kong

The future banking CEO will be tasked with navigating an industry landscape that is rapidly evolving, marked by unprecedented geopolitical pressures, technological disruption, and shifting social dynamics. Banks have been going through a singularly challenging business cycle, facing a growing number of stakeholders with competing priorities. These complexities demand leaders who can deftly manage uncertainty and steer their organizations through unpredictable waters.

However, identifying and developing leaders with this rare combination of expertise and leadership characteristics has become progressively difficult for banking boards.

In this paper, we examine the current state of the banking CEO talent pool—the challenges contemporary banking CEOs face, the essential experiences and competencies required to overcome these challenges, and how banks can proactively develop holistic CEO succession programs capable of producing the next generation of effective leaders.

Banks have bred highly specialized and technical leaders

Given the complexity, systemic importance, and stringent regulation of the banking sector, leaders have long been required to develop specialized expertise in key areas. This focus intensified further following the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), as banks increasingly prioritized regulatory compliance and technical mastery within specific business units. However, this came at the expense of generalist development programs, producing a generation of executives with deep technical skills but more limited leadership breadth.

Our data supports this trend. In analyzing the backgrounds of global banking C-suite leaders, we found that a majority (67%) have had experience in two or fewer business units. Only 14% have worked in more than three business units over the course of their careers, underscoring the prevalence of specialization (Figure 1).

As a result, many leaders struggle with the "leadership sixth sense"—the ability to ask the right questions, quickly get to the core of an issue, and maintain a strategic perspective. Instead, executives often remain entrenched in their areas of specialization, unable to zoom out and address broader issues from a holistic viewpoint.

Figure 1. Senior Banking executives, by business unit experience

Source: RRA Analysis N=110 CVs of candidates put forward for banking CEO roles between [2010-2023]. Business units included retail banking, commercial banking, corporate banking, investment banking, wealth management and treasury and security services.

The banking CEO talent pool has been further limited by a series of external and internal factors

Market consolidation

Since the 2008 financial crash, the banking industry has undergone considerable consolidation, reducing the number of banks operating in key markets. For example, in the U.S. alone, the number of banks dropped from 8,000 in 2008 to just over 4,000 in 2024.

This consolidation has brought increased scale and complexity, as banks that once focused on a few core product lines now offer a wide range of services, from digital payment solutions to insurance. This reduced number of comparable institutions, coupled with the increasing complexity of banking models, has led to a tighter external talent pool. Our own executive search engagements reflect this, with banking CEO candidate lists becoming shorter over the past few years.

Structural and cultural challenges

The structure of most banks further limits the development of generalist leaders. Executives are often confined to their own divisions, with performance metrics tied to specific business units or functions, often becoming absorbed by daily operations. This inward focus on specialization and execution, combined with regulatory constraints, leaves little room for cross-functional, cross-business, and external stakeholder management expertise, critical assets for those aspiring to the CEO role.

Cultural factors also play a role. Many banks operate within ingrained mindsets, reinforced by hierarchical cultures and incentive structures that often prioritize technical proficiency. This narrow focus can lead to a “checklist” mentality in hiring and development—one that prizes specific past experiences over broader leadership attributes.

Ineffective development programs

RRA’s Global Leadership Monitor found that, while 46% of the banks surveyed report that they are being proactive in succession planning, 74% of next gen leaders who have been through a succession process said they would like more support from their organization as they work towards more senior leadership roles. Especially at senior levels, development programs must be carefully crafted, individually tailored, and continuously revisited as the leader moves through their career journey.

As the talent pool tightens, the CEO job is becoming harder than ever

The global banking landscape is undergoing a profound transformation, driven by a confluence of macroeconomic forces and unique industry-specific challenges. Through our conversations with clients, we have identified six key themes that are reshaping the banking landscape today:

Figure 2. Macro themes reshaping leadership imperatives

Geopolitical transition

Paradigm has shifted to a multipolar world with emerging markets changing the balance of power - it is not a western-dominated world anymore, and banking executives are being tested by the dynamics this creates.

Competitive complexity

Competition no longer happens within silos, as incumbent banks crossover into adjacencies, and as new tech-enabled entrants continue to disintermediate the banking value-chain.

Technological disruption

Technology is foundational ("run the firm") and fast evolving, creating strategic management opportunities ("change the firm") and challenges such as the fast-emerging AI implications.

Proliferation of stakeholders

Banks are being confronted with several non-traditional stakeholders (e.g. climate activists, social media) and the challenge of balancing an ever-broadening range of priorities, in real time, raises the risk of any missteps.

Increasing
volatility

Unpredictable and extraordinary events are creating instability across financial services leading to cross-boarder as well as cross-sector contagion risks that are unfolding at an unprecedented pace.

Shift towards "one bank strategies"

Banks are increasingly mitigating against single lines of businesses and are implementing strategies that emphasize cohesion and connectivity across business lines and geographies, bringing the "full power of the bank" to clients.

The new banking paradigm requires leaders with a breadth of exposure and experiences

Operating within a highly regulated industry, banks still require CEOs that bring a core set of "table-stakes" experiences. When it comes to these foundational experiences, it is important to consider both depth and quality; for instance, assessing whether or not candidates have navigated key crises, made high stakes consequential decisions, or managed high profile stakeholders.

These table stakes experiences typically include:

Experience managing capital and risk: CEO successors must lead organizations that drive the global economy while protecting assets and generating returns. This requires deep capital management experience and a thorough understanding of the regulatory landscape. Additionally, candidates must have not only risk management experience but also the thinking agility to understand new risks and how these risks interconnect and translate into new challenges.

Experience managing balance sheets: CEO candidates must possess the ability to optimize the bank’s assets, liabilities, and equity to ensure financial stability and growth. This includes maintaining liquidity, managing debt, and leveraging the balance sheet to enhance returns while mitigating risks. A deep understanding of balance sheet dynamics is critical for ensuring long-term profitability and solvency.

Experience driving P&L performance: P&L experience is undoubtedly a must-have when it comes to CEO hopefuls. However, when it comes to assessing P&L experience, it’s important not to treat it as a “check the box” exercise, but instead to carefully examine the sophistication and depth of this crucial requirement.

In addition to these foundational requirements, leading banks are now also seeking a set of differentiating experiences in their next CEO, including:

Broad exposure to multiple business lines and geographies: CEO candidates should ideally have a few years’ experience within multiple key business lines and regions. This experience gives leaders the ability to zoom in and out effectively and provides them with an “enterprise mindset.”

Broad experience with leadership at scale or complexity: Leading at scale, achieving complex goals, and demonstrated evidence of leading business transformation is also increasingly moving up the list of desired experiences.

Beyond these experiential requirements, CEOs need to display a unique balance of leadership characteristics and competencies

Determining whether CEO candidates have the requisite experience is the first and often easier part of the process. Our research and experience suggest that the best CEO candidates also possess a highly unique set of leadership characteristics and competencies. This unique combination forms the blueprint for a truly effective leader in today's complex environment.

Figure 3. Unique balance of leadership characteristics and competencies

The path forward for banking leadership

Given this complex and almost impossible set of criteria, it is no wonder that banks are finding it increasingly difficult to source their next CEO, either internally or externally. They are often realizing too late that they don’t have enough leaders ready to successfully step into a C-suite role, let alone the CEO role. Leadership development requires a proactive approach to cultivating talent, not just finding it. The limited availability within the existing talent pool necessitates a multi-tiered strategy that tackles existing gaps while building a pipeline for future needs.

Align early and build familiarity

One of the most critical—and often overlooked—steps in CEO succession is the early alignment of the board around a future-oriented CEO role profile. Prior to any candidate evaluation, the board must understand the market context, its constraints, and the organization's strategic priorities. This clarity ensures that the board can define not only the desired organizational culture but also what success will look like for the future CEO, setting thoughtful goals for talent acquisition and development.

Against this backdrop, the board and key stakeholders should align on the desired expertise, leadership capabilities, and personal attributes required for the future CEO. Do not underestimate the importance of upfront alignment – without it, the CEO profile risks becoming an unachievably long “laundry list” of qualifications. Trade-offs will inevitably arise. While it may be tempting to prioritize expertise and technical skills—such as P&L management, capital management or risk expertise—the differentiator of a truly impactful CEO is frequently a unique balance of leadership attributes. Increasingly, leading organizations are dialing down the premium on technical experience and placing greater emphasis on broader leadership potential.

Additionally, this process is significantly enhanced when the Board and sitting CEO have proactively cultivated relationships early on with internal – and, where applicable, external – candidates. Familiarity breeds trust and understanding, allowing the board to have deeper insights into strengths, development areas, and leadership styles of internal contenders, as well as a clearer view of external options. This early cultivation of relationships not only informs decision-making but also contributes to a more aligned and well-managed process.

The outcome of a well-informed and well-managed process should be a forward-looking leadership blueprint and CEO role profile, intricately linked to the organization’s long-term strategy. This profile serves as both an internal and external benchmark for evaluating CEO candidates and informs tailored assessment methods and development programs for the C-suite and emerging leaders. To remain relevant, this profile should be continuously refined to align with evolving cultural, strategic, and business context—ensuring you secure a leader who is not only effective today but equipped to navigate the complexities of tomorrow.

Integrate C-suite and CEO succession

RRA’s CEO Turnover Index shows that over 85% of recent Banking CEO appointments were internal; a closer look at the top 20 banks show that current CEOs were in their prior position at the bank for on average 7 years before assuming the group CEO role, allowing enough time for a thoughtful development program. While the exact starting point for CEO succession will naturally vary across banks and their markets, this underscores the importance of closely integrating C-suite and CEO succession.

CEO succession and C-suite succession are inherently intertwined. To ensure a strong talent bench for your next CEO, focus on getting the right people into C-suite roles over the course of multiple years through both external hiring and internal promotion, assembling a team with complementary expertise and diverse perspectives. Continuously invest in their development as individuals and as a cohort, building a high-performing collaborative team around the CEO that can collectively amplify the CEO’s strengths, compensate for any gaps, and drive the organization forward with a unified vision. This team will serve as your most powerful talent incubator for the next CEO. By taking these steps, the board not only safeguards the success of the current CEO, but also enhances optionality for future CEO succession.

Start early with emerging leaders

To truly address the CEO talent gap, organizations must begin cultivating tomorrow’s leaders today. Identify high-potential talent just below the C-suite, assessing them on both technical excellence and leadership potential. Early identification enables targeted development, which should include broad exposure to cross-functional roles, multiple geographies, functions, and strategic decision-making opportunities. The development process should include exposure and mentorship with sitting C-suite and board members, as well as other key stakeholders, as familiarity fosters understanding.

It’s crucial to help emerging leaders develop the attributes needed to inspire and guide others, such as authenticity, inclusivity, resilience, and the ability to lead through change. By investing in developing these characteristics , organizations can ensure that their next generation of leaders is not only technically proficient but also equipped to navigate complexities and lead with vision and empathy. As we look to the horizon, it's conceivable that advancements in artificial intelligence may one day take over the technical aspects of the role, leaving CEOs to focus on being empathetic people leaders and strategic vision setters.

This is not just about preparing for the next CEO transition—it’s about ensuring the long-term success and resilience of the organization. By committing to the systematic development of next-generation talent, banks can lay the foundation for sustained leadership excellence in the years to come.

Authors

Nicholas Anderson is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in Hong Kong.
Jane Bird co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Banking practice. She is based in London.
Shawn Cooper is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO and Financial Services practices. He is based in Toronto.
James Diggines leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ global Financial Services practice. He is based in Singapore.
Sean Dineen is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in Boston.
Tal Friedler is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services Knowledge team. She is based in London.
Dee Symons is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO practice. She is based in London.
Mary-Caroline Tillman is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services practice. She is based in New York.
Cem Turan leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Beijing Zhu is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. She is based in Hong Kong.

Tomorrow’s Banking CEO: Charting Succession for the Future

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices