Proactive Governance: Shaping Hong Kong’s Boards of Tomorrow | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Proactive Governance: Shaping Hong Kong’s Boards of Tomorrow

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

Caris Wong

December 11, 2024

8 min

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Changes are coming for HKEx-listed companies. Our research uncovers the impact and how boards can better transition.

Close

Caris Wong

Hong Kong

Insights for nominating committees on board performance, succession planning, and diversity in Hong Kong’s evolving governance landscape.

On 19 December 2024, the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEx) released the conclusions to its consultation on proposed enhancements to the Corporate Governance Code and related amendments to the HKEx Listing Rules. Most of these enhancements come into effect on July 1, 2025, and to a large extent will impact listed boards and their nominating committees in the areas of performance assessments as well as strategies for board renewal and succession planning.

In responding to these updates, boards have to strategically manage the six-year transition period to prevent a sudden overhaul of long-tenured INEDs, while also considering appointments for key roles like lead independent directors to maintain leadership continuity and regulatory compliance.

Nominating committees will need to start early to examine their board succession strategies, and proactively engaging with the talent pool. We believe that they could therefore consider:

Initiating a comprehensive board effectiveness exercise, focusing on board composition analysis to determine necessary skillsets and experiences for future strategies, and develop a detailed board skills matrix; and

Reassessing their succession plans, considering the tenure of current independent directors to enhance future board profiles and ensure diversity that is in line with policy.

How will boards in the Hang Seng Index be impacted?

The enhancements contain specific limits around tenure, overboarding, independence, and board diversity, including:

Board directors serving more than nine years will no longer be considered independent (following a six-year transition period with an interim arrangement after three years requiring boards to maintain a majority of non-long serving independent directors)

Directors will be limited to a maximum of six publicly-listed boards (following a three-year transition period)

Nominating committees must be comprised of directors of different genders, with a minimum of one director of a different gender (comply or explain)

Additionally, there are other mandatory disclosure requirements on director training, the board’s annual review of its workforce diversity, and women’s representation within senior management.

Russell Reynolds Associates conducted a comparison of the Hang Seng Index (HSI) — an index of the 82 largest companies listed on HKEx— with other leading global indices to guide HKEx listed boards towards embracing proactive governance. Our analysis of the Hang Seng Index is indicative of the extent of change required for boards listed in Hong Kong.

Tenure caps will impact Hong Kong’s board composition

One of the corporate governance updates that will significantly impact board composition in Hong Kong: the nine-year tenure cap for independent directors. Our analysis shows that 27% of INEDs on the HSI boards have served for over nine years.

In contrast, FTSE 100 boards regularly refresh their composition, with 98% of INEDs serving nine years or less (Figure 1). And while it may seem that boards on the HSI share a similar tenure distributions with those of the S&P 500, it needs to be viewed in the context that the Nasdaq and NYSE generally require boards to comprise a majority of independent directors.

Figure 1: Tenure distribution of INEDs across the S&P 500, FTSE 100, and HSI

Source: RRA analysis of BoardEx data, collected in October 2024. n = 4699 S&P 500 INEDs; n = 773 FTSE 100 INEDs; n = 416 HSI INEDs.

The HKEx has introduced a two-phase transition period for up to six years, allowing boards ample time to implement necessary adjustments. Nonetheless, we recommend that boards begin planning for succession as early as possible to ensure smooth transitions and sustained governance excellence.

Overboarding limits: Limited disruption

The next enhancement involves limiting the maximum number of listed boards directors can sit on to six. In examining the S&P 500 and FTSE 100, we see that over 90% of INEDs sit on three or less public boards (Figure 2). In Hong Kong, only four out of 82 HSI boards have directors who sit on more than six boards.

Figure 2: Number of concurrent public board seats an INED has across the S&P 500, FTSE 100, and HSI

Source: RRA analysis of BoardEx data, collected in October 2024. n = 4699 S&P 500 INEDs; n = 773 FTSE 100 INEDs; n = 416 HSI INEDs.

If what we are seeing on the HSI boards is reflective of the state of play in Hong Kong, then it is unlikely that most boards will be affected by the six-board limit. Regardless, given the increasingly complex business environment over the years, the reality is that boards today do require more of a director’s bandwidth. As such, the cap of six boards per director appears reasonable.

Enhancements will improve nominating committee diversity in Hong Kong

While there has been recent progress when it comes to board diversity, Hong Kong boards still have a long way to go before reaching gender parity. Currently, 40% of HSI boards’ nominating committees are composed entirely of men. We also found that women directors hold only 20% of the HSI’s nominating committee seats, compared to women holding 48% in the FTSE 100 and 40% in the S&P 500 (Figure 3). Under the new enhancements, these boards will need to appoint a women director or explain to HKEx (Figure 4).

Figure 3: Percentage of women directors holding nominating committee seats across the S&P 500, FTSE 100, and HSI

Source: RRA analysis of BoardEx data, collected in October 2024. n= 1600 S&P 500 nominating committee seats; n = 583 FTSE 100 nominating committee seats; n = 328 HSI nominating committee seats.

Figure 4: HSI boards that need to appoint a NomCo member of a different gender

Source: RRA analysis of BoardEx data, collected in October 2024, n = 82 HSI boards.

According to the Institute of Directors (IoD), markets with binding quotas have seen the most significant advancements towards gender parity over the past two decades. For instance, women’s representation in FTSE 100 increased from 12.5% in 2012 to 40% by 2022, according to the UK Government.

As such, the enhancements to 1) implement a gender-diverse nominating committee on a comply or explain basis and to 2) mandate disclosures of board diversity policies present a major step towards gender parity in the HSI.

Hong Kong is aligning with other OECD countries in LID recommendations

Under the new Corporate Governance Code, HKEx has introduced the designation of a lead independent director (LID) for boards whose chairs are non-independent as an Recommended Best Practices (RBP). This move is a step to directionally align Hong Kong with many OECD countries—like the United Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden—where board chairs are typically independent (Figure 5).

Figure 5: Percentage of boards that have an independent chair across the S&P 500, FTSE 100, and HSI

Source: RRA analysis of BoardEx data, collected in October 2024. n = 500 S&P 500 boards; n = 100 FTSE 100 boards; n = 82 HSI boards.

Looking inward: HSI boards will increase focus on their effectiveness and skillsets

The final set of enhancements centers on enhancing board effectiveness and upskilling.

Implementing a board skills matrix is a logical first step, as it clearly outlines the critical expertise and experiences necessary for the board’s effective functioning. This matrix not only informs shareholders and investors about potential areas where the board may need reinforcing, but also aligns with the mandatory director training disclosures. Furthermore, it offers valuable insights for board succession planning over the longer term.

What’s next for HKEx-listed boards?

HKEx-listed boards are navigating a pivotal period marked by significant regulatory changes with listed boards actively determining their response strategies. It is crucial for HKEx-listed boards to carefully examine the corporate governance enhancements and evaluate the merits of implementing the changes proactively before the transition deadlines.

To that end, HKEx-listed boards should consider the following:

Embark on a comprehensive board effectiveness exercise

Tackling these new requirements hinges on the board’s ability and willingness to embark on a comprehensive board effectiveness exercise, using the results to drive the response to the new corporate governance requirements.

Key to this exercise is a board composition analysis, through which the board articulates what skillsets and experiences are required for it to help the company navigate the business landscape over the medium to long-term based on its chosen strategies.

The analysis will result in a fleshed-out board skills matrix. This provides the board with both a measure for its current team and structure, as well as a roadmap of key attributes for its future slate of directors.

Re-examine the succession plan

Taking the tenure of current independent directors in account adds further color to the director succession plan, as the board now knows when each director—and their associated skillset—will have to exit.

With that insight, the nominating committee can then deliberate over what future succession profiles should look like, including considerations around the diversity requirements. This will allow for future board appointments to be more robust and better able to withstand scrutiny.

Keep an eye on the transition

The six-year transition allowance should not be taken lightly, especially if the current board comprises exactly a third of long-tenured INEDs. Nominating committees will need to make use of this to avoid a “cliff” situation, in which the board suddenly has to swap out all the long-tenured INEDs at once.

Should there be a desire to pursue better practice, the appointment of lead independent directors (LIDs) also needs to be managed well, given the role expectations. Generally, a more seasoned and experienced director would be desirable—this is a factor the nominating committee needs to consider when succession-planning for this position. For example, should a sitting INED be appointed as LID or should the board embark on a search for one?

Authors

Alvin Chiang is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners. He is based in Singapore.
Caris Wong is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer and Board Advisory Practice. She is based in Hong Kong
Justine Qin is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Knowledge Management team in Asia Pacific. She is based in Beijing.

Acknowledgements

Laura Syn is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Knowledge Management team in Asia Pacific. She is based in Hong Kong.
Chensong Li is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Knowledge Management team in Asia Pacific. He is based in Shanghai.

Proactive Governance: Shaping Hong Kong’s Boards of Tomorrow

Changes are coming for HKEx-listed companies. Our research uncovers the impact and how boards can better transition.

Download full article

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Private EquityPrivate CreditBoard of Directors

Why Athletes Make Effective Leaders

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices