Redefine, Revise and Reinforce: Talent strategies for a new era of impact | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Redefine, Revise and Reinforce: Talent Strategies For a New Era of Social Impact

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationArts and CultureEducationSocial ImpactTrade and Professional AssociationsBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Article

May 20, 2025

5 min

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationArts and CultureEducationSocial ImpactTrade and Professional AssociationsBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Agile talent strategies and a new type of leader are key to navigating US funding shifts.

Close

Jamie Hechinger

Washington DC

Tory Clark

Atlanta
Washington DC

The recent changes in US federal government funding priorities are prompting many social impact organizations to reassess their strategies, theories of change, and the leadership required to deliver both. As senior leaders naturally focus on urgent – and sometimes existential – organizational needs, they may also find themselves in moments that accelerate the growth and development of their leadership talent at all levels of the organization.

During historical moments of profound uncertainty, we have noticed that the most agile organizations employ the tactics below to drive leadership performance and development in the midst of urgency and ambiguity.

Redefine what it means to be a leader

1. Bet on pragmatism and perseverance
As one philanthropic leader recently reflected, “Now is the time for sturdy leadership.” A crisis exerts sudden, substantial pressure on leaders and provides a real test of their ability to persevere in spite of it. Leaders need to act with urgency while not being overly reactionary; nimble in their strategy, yet grounded by their mission. Look for – and allocate more responsibility to – those who demonstrate a combination of calm, competence, and confidence in the face of chaos.  Effective leaders know when to galvanize action and when to step back and observe.

2. Look for leaders who look outward – and thrive amidst ambiguity
During times of uncertainty and disruption, many top leaders succumb to the natural human tendency to retreat inward and fail to support each other. Ironically, they become more individualistic at the very time when leadership matters most. The best leaders recognize and resist this response, and, critically, support peers who need their guidance and mentorship. They are not only navigators, but also visionaries who chart courses where none seem apparent. Their ability to provide clarity in confusion sets them apart and drives the organization, and even the ecosystems within which they operate, forward.

3. Reject the false trade-off between urgency and empathy
The best leaders differentiate themselves by their effectiveness in acting not only with urgency and agility, but also with empathy and humanity. That’s not to say that balancing these two styles is easy, especially in an environment in which leaders are being asked to contend with complexity and ambiguity amid an extreme pace of change. Elevating and developing leaders whose skillsets sit at the intersection of agility and empathy will ensure that the organization is able to navigate challenging moments, while preserving the humanity and decency that will sustain it in the long-term.

Revise your talent strategy

4. Take note of what this moment reveals about your leaders
As we saw during the COVID pandemic, many organizations navigating moments of dislocation will find a surprising share of their leaders are unwilling or unable to lead in a challenging or uncertain environment. Many also find that they have underestimated leaders who step up in unexpected and critical ways. Take note of what this period of uncertainty reveals about your talent bench – the coming months will expose gaps and surface hidden gems.

5. Prepare for a surge in demand for upgrades to newly-appreciated roles
As the shape of the new social impact sector begins to clarify, organizations may see significant demand for talent upgrades in newly critical – or newly appreciated – roles. In the short-term, we expect this to include chief development officers and other fundraising and revenue generating leaders, as well as government affairs, communications, board directors, and others tasked with sharing the organization’s interests externally. In the longer-term, this may include other functions where the ability to credibly articulate impact will become key to demonstrating outcomes and maintaining revenue.

6. Re-examine succession plans
If your current CEO succession plan is identical to what it looked like six months ago, your board has not been paying attention or performing its fiduciary duties. That’s not to say that an entirely different profile of leader is necessarily needed, but it does mean that sitting CEOs and CHROs must be very clear with the board about what they have learned about their leaders and organizational needs during this moment, and how their succession plans might change as a result.

7. Remember that cold recruiting engines take time to restart
In the wake of COVID and other past crises, many organizations found it took years to restart their recruiting engines and rebuild talent pipelines. This issue is already registering for industry leaders, as RRA’s latest Global Leadership Monitor found that only 34% of nonprofit leaders feel prepared to address the availability of key talent/skills in the sector, lower than their private sector peers. A thoughtful approach to keeping those engines running – even if at a slower rate – will enable you to reharness momentum when talent markets heat up again.

Reinforce the next generation

8. Empower emerging leaders to drive success
In crises, senior executives often assert control, limiting direct reports' leadership growth. This can lead to rising leaders becoming operators rather than decision-makers, weakening leadership ranks over time. Equally, merit and potential often emerge from unexpected places during challenges, with strong leadership demonstrated by those without senior titles. By strategically deploying talent to ensure initiatives are led by those with both strong capabilities and high potential, organizations can benefit from their creativity, enabling innovation and resilience.

9. Disruption can strengthen culture
Create space and time for teams to gather, share insights, and problem solve. In times of steady change, leaders can rely on direct authority to manage. And when challenges grow more severe, leaders must also rely on influence and inspiration to motivate their teams. Tumultuous external environments will engender deeper loyalty when managed effectively.

10. Do not underestimate the power and necessity of internal communication
Regular, just-enough, forward-focused, and empathetic communication serves as the backbone for team alignment and motivation, especially during challenging times. Together, these communication strategies not only maintain morale but also drive cohesive progress, enabling teams to adapt and thrive in the face of adversity.

Authors

Tory Clark co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Development, Advocacy and Philanthropy practice. She is based in Atlanta.
Jamie Hechinger leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education sector. She is based in Washington, DC.
Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education sector Knowledge team. She is based in Portland, OR.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices