What Makes a Good Portfolio CFO? The Skills European CFOs Need to Unlock Value | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Makes a Good Portfolio CFO? The Skills European CFOs Need to Unlock Value

Career AdvicePortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinance OfficersDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Article

+ 3 authors

May 02, 2025

6 min

Career AdvicePortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinance OfficersDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

As European deal value and count increase YoY with an anticipating surge in exits, having the right CFO has never been more critical.

Close

Romain Clio

Brussels

Andres Gil-Casares

Madrid
Barcelona

Ben Jones

London

Daniela Nienstedt

Frankfurt

Sophia Nerell

Stockholm

Nick Roche

London

It’s an incredibly competitive market for private equity portfolio CFOs.

As European deal value and count increase year-over-year along with the PE market anticipating a significant surge in exits, RRA research finds that the senior leadership team is the most important contributing factor to a successful exit. As such, hiring an experienced CFO has never been more important.

To better understand the attributes and skillsets of what makes a “good” portfolio CFO in the European private equity landscape, Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed 42 investors, portfolio CEOs, and portfolio Chairs, learning that:

Previous CFO experience remains critical for portfolio CFOs

Industry experience is not as crucial to portfolio CFO success as once thought

Investors have mixed views on whether CFOs need prior exit experience

Financial reporting, cash flow management and strategic partnerships are key to driving necessary growth

89%

rated previous CFO experience as very to extremely important for portfolio CFOs

29%

of respondents see industry experience as very to extremely important to portfolio CFO success

44%

see having prior exit experience as very to extremely important for a CFO to have when contemplating selling the business

96%

rank commercial partnerships with business units/CEO and financial reporting as critical to CFO leadership and technical competencies

Russell Reynolds Associates January 2025 Survey to European Private Equity Investors and Portfolio Company Chairs & CEOs, N= 42

Read on to learn more about key CFO experiences, what a good portfolio CFO looks like today, and how investors can gain confidence in selecting their next portfolio CFOs.

The #1 factor contributing to a strong exit? The organization’s leadership team

In today’s fast-evolving financial landscape, investors are quick to adjust their management team to ensure a successful exit, with 39%  of respondents stating that they would replace their portfolio CFO immediately or within one year and 54% completing the process within two years.

When asked which factors contribute to a successful exit, a strong leadership team was the most common answer, followed by the organization’s growth potential (Figure 1). Given how critical the CFO role is to unlocking value and growth, hiring the right individual is of the utmost importance.

Figure 1: The key factors which contribute to a successful exit

% of respondents selecting in top 3*

*Respondents were only asked to select the top 3 factors from a list of 6 options. | Russell Reynolds Associates January 2025 Survey to European Private Equity Investors and Portfolio Company Chairs & CEOs, N= 42

In addition, a recent Deloitte study highlighted the potential impact a skilled CFO has on enterprise value, finding that one-third of portfolio CEOs and investors believe that a strong CFO can drive up to 20% higher value realizations during an exit. A further half suggest an uplift between 5% and 20%.

Previous CFO experience remains critical for portfolio CFOs

Our survey found that a significant 89% of portfolio CEO, Chair and investors believe that previous CFO experience is very to extremely important for portfolio CFOs. When faced with market volatility, some investors and CEOs may seek comfort by appointing a proven CFO.

Industry experience is not as crucial to portfolio CFO success as once thought

Surprisingly, only 29% of portfolio CEO, Chair and investors believe that industry experience is important to a portfolio CFO’s success. This is likely due to the importance of industry experience being elsewhere within the management team; there is a degree of transferability of skills between finance roles across sectors.

Investors have mixed views on whether CFOs need prior exit experience

Portfolio CEOs, Chairs and investors are divided on whether CFOs need prior exit experience when contemplating selling the business, with 44% agreeing that this is a very/extremely important factor.

This mix of perspectives can likely be attributed to a slowdown in deal flow and a push out in exit dates which lowered the immediate need to exit experience. However, this still remains important to some given the anticipated uptick in deal activity in the likelihood of interest rates continuing to decline and private equity funds sitting on elevated levels of dry powder.

Financial reporting, cash flow management, strategic partnerships: The skills and experiences that drive growth

When asked about the most critical leadership traits for portfolio company CFOs in the next two to three years, respondents emphasized portfolio company CFOs strategically and commercially partnering with the CEO, delivering on the annual plan, and holding the team accountable for results (Figure 2).

Figure 2: The most critical leadership traits for portfolio CFOs in the next 2-3 years

% of leaders selecting very / extremely important*

*Respondents were asked to rank for each trait from least important to extremely important from a list of 7 options. | Russell Reynolds Associates January 2025 Survey to European Private Equity Investors and Portfolio Company Chairs & CEOs, N= 42

Furthermore, PE investors and CEOs value CFOs with strong financial reporting and controls experience, as well as working capital management and cash flow experience (Figure 3). These competencies are likely to support a potential exit strategy.

Figure 3: The technical competencies that are important for a portfolio CFO

% of leaders selecting very / extremely important*

*Respondents were asked to rank for each trait from least important to extremely important from a list of 12 options with the top 8 options stated in the graph. | Russell Reynolds Associates January 2025 Survey to European Private Equity Investors and Portfolio Company Chairs & CEOs, N= 42

The way forward: How to gain confidence in your portfolio CFO selection process

CFOs are essential in driving value creation and growth within portfolio companies. As such, it’s of the utmost importance that investors and CEOs select the right CFO. To ensure this, we suggest the following tactics:

01

Get creative around the CFO profile

As the CFO market remains tight, reconsidering must-haves—including leading an exit, or prior industry experience—may allow for an expanded talent pool that offers the opportunity to access more diverse top candidates.

02

Use deeper assessment tools

While 89% of investors interview the leadership team during the due diligence process, only 29% leverage in-depth psychometric and holistic assessment methods. These methods provide the best insights on the leader and fully evaluate their performance.

03

Invest in development

Assessing, developing, and mentoring talent within your finance organization and across portfolio companies is essential to unlocking the next generation of talent. We repeatedly see the same leadership gaps and hasty transitions impede a talented financial executive’s success in the role so having the right development and mentorship can provide confidence.

04

The right team for success

While getting the CFO right is critical, nailing the team below is just as important. A CFO’s ability to succeed in an exit depends heavily on the quality of the people, and processes at their disposal. Building the right team and processes takes time and must begin well in advance of the exit process by starting with an honest assessment of the finance function to understand where potential gaps may lie.

The authors wish to thank the investors, portfolio CEOs, and portfolio chairs  from RRA’s network who responded to the survey. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of what makes a good portfolio CFO in 2025 and beyond.

Authors

Romain Clio is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Brussels.
Andres Gil-Casares is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Madrid.
Ben Jones co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice in EMEA. He is based in London.
Mohammed Khan is a member Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Daniela Nienstedt co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice in EMEA. She is based in Frankfurt.
Sophia Nerell is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. She is based in Stockholm.
Nick Roche is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in London.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices