Reshaping a Company’s Board Post-Bankruptcy | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Reshaping a Company’s Board Post-Bankruptcy

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionPrivate CapitalBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

April 22, 2025

6 min

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionPrivate CapitalBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

Early planning, strong leadership, and effective board composition helps creditors drive agile post-bankruptcy turnarounds.

Close

Heather Hammond

New York

Noah Schwarz

New York

Emily Taylor

New York
London

Since Russell Reynolds Associates originally reported on board restructuring five years ago, pressures on businesses have only increased. New geopolitical tensions, macroeconomic challenges, elevated interest rates, and technological change are further straining organizations, resulting in a growing number of businesses finding themselves in a stressed or distressed financial position. Bankruptcy filings are at a new high since the GFC, resulting in a surge of company restructurings.1

Notable in the current environment is the increasing prominence of alternative capital, including private credit. Private credit providers are distributing more flexible and creative capital to struggling companies. Private lending and debt-for-equity transactions have enabled countless organizations to avoid Chapter 11 filings and supported restructurings. Debt-for-equity swaps result in investors managing companies that emerge with a clean balance sheet, but have other complex challenges to address. And unlike private equity or buyout investors, who scope strategic and operational value creation plans during due diligence, these lenders generally have less active management experience.

These combined challenges highlight a pressing need: building an effective corporate board post-restructuring. Yet this is not an easy task. The normal complexity of director recruitment and onboarding, not to mention the effective implementation of corporate governance practices, is only increased as a result of the company’s legal and financial challenges.

Combining insights from our latest work supporting clients who are reestablishing their organizations, as well as recommendations shared by experienced board members, investors and industry professionals, this paper intends to provide a best practice road map for investors and companies looking to build a strong, highly effective board post-restructuring.

Six steps for successful board restructures

The search and selection process for post-bankruptcy boards is more complex than traditional director hires, owing to the size and speed of change required. Most frequently, the board (like the management team) is reconstituted from scratch. This wholesale change removes the institutional, relational and process knowledge typically leveraged to advantage the search process and director onboarding. Additionally, there is a greater need for speed, both in rebuilding and action. The board needs to regain confidence among shareholders, customers, and other stakeholders (e.g., regulators). There is no time to wait; board directors need to be appointed quickly, so they can dig in and begin driving value.

01 Start early

While building the post-bankruptcy board is an incredibly important task, it is often relegated to the end of the to-do list along with items like preparing the disclosure statement or negotiating with other classes of creditors. However, delaying the process risks value erosion if and where involved parties take shortcuts and rush appointments. This often happens in bids to conclude lengthy, sometimes contentious, restructuring processes.

Rather than scrambling, creditors should begin planning for a reconstructed board as soon as they believe they will become controlling shareholders. Early working hypotheses on value creation levers should inform the board’s composition, establish strategic committees at the outset, and influence the type of leadership needed to propel the business forward.

Starting early benefits incoming directors too. With time, they can plan the early work of the board, establish relationships with fellow directors, and get a good understanding of the company and its challenges.

02 Identify a chair

Given that the chair is the board’s most prominent role – helping anchor the board, assisting in recruiting other directors and the management team, and driving the restructuring agenda for shareholders – appointing the right person is critical. Without a strong leader, boards lack accountability and agenda control easily cedes to management.

In most cases, the ideal candidate will be an experienced CEO or chair, or an experienced restructuring professional who served as a board chair during a similar period. This combination of operating and advisory experience enables them to fully counsel the CEO and senior leadership team as the company emerges from bankruptcy.

03 Determine the optimal size

Our advice on board size? Aim small. Small boards increase the focus, engagement, and accountability of each individual director. When you choose the right directors — those who add value, contribute independently, and bring novel ideas to the table — small boards can have an outsized impact.

04 Aim for a varied mix of the right experiences and behaviors

Company turnarounds go beyond balance sheet, operational, and legal issues. There has likely been historic under-investment and talent retention challenges prior to bankruptcy, followed by low morale after the time-consuming bankruptcy process. To navigate these wide-ranging challenges, the board needs strong, capable directors who thrive in high-visibility situations, are comfortable making tough calls, and can bring a diverse and relevant set of experiences. Ideally, board members should bring the following mix of skills:

Leadership and governance: Experience in leading organizations through change and ensuring robust governance practices to maintain transparency and accountability.

Change management: Skills in managing and guiding organizational change to ensure smooth transitions and employee alignment.

Strategic planning: The ability to develop and implement effective strategies that align with the company’s new direction and market opportunities.

Financial acumen: Strong understanding of financial statements, budgeting, and financial restructuring to ensure fiscal responsibility and sustainable growth.

Risk management: Skills in identifying, assessing, and mitigating risks, particularly those related to financial stability and operational resilience.

Operational expertise: Experience in operations can help streamline processes and improve efficiency, which is vital for rebuilding the company's foundation.

Crisis management: Ability to handle unforeseen challenges effectively and make decisions under pressure.

Legal and compliance knowledge: A firm grasp of legal and regulatory requirements to ensure the company adheres to all necessary laws and standards.

Communication: Strong communication skills to articulate the company’s vision and strategies to stakeholders. Managing perception can help restore confidence.

Industry knowledge: Deep understanding of the industry to navigate market dynamics and competitive landscapes.

Innovation and adaptability: Ability to foster innovation and adapt to changing market conditions to keep the company competitive.

When building the entire board, it is important to evaluate candidates for every seat. Consider how well individuals will work together, and whether their combined strengths and weaknesses complement the overall board composition.

05 Establish the board culture and set behavioral expectations

Boards with positive cultures promote trust, focus, and embrace new ideas. Directors are deliberate and thoughtful, and more likely to constructively challenge executives when appropriate. While the chair plays a vital role in establishing a strong board culture, our research indicates that the best results are achieved when a group of directors are intentional about building a positive culture.

Behaviors for board chairs

Behaviors for board directors

Focuses the board’s attention on relevant matters

Open to new ideas and methods

Encourages independence

Challenges management constructively

Facilitates high-quality debates

Stays focused on relevant issues

Seeks diverse viewpoints

Builds trust among directors

Utilizes directors' experiences

Avoids crossing into operations

Provides constructive feedback

06 Clearly explain the risks

Directors need to be specialists in areas central to the new owner’s strategic direction for the company. More importantly — as cash compensation tends to be light on post-bankruptcy boards — alignment with the company’s mission, a desire to drive positive impact, and the capacity to devote the appropriate amount of time are all crucial.

Despite the lower cash compensation, the time commitment and workload are heavier than that of a typical independent director role. Directors on post-bankruptcy boards report more meetings, phone calls, outside networking, and involvement with running the business. External public surveys suggest active engagement by board members of a post-restructured company can require at least 50% more time than public company directors.2

Compared to other circumstances, director remuneration skews toward equity-heavy compensation packages and multi-year vesting schedules. While there are many benefits to serving on post-bankruptcy boards, candidates should reflect on whether they are a good match for their operating terms and long-term expectations.

Client Situation

A leading national healthcare group that filed one of the largest bankruptcies since the GFC. Financial pressures stemmed from COVID-19 impacts, insurance payor delays, and regulatory uncertainties. Despite these challenges, the company maintained normal operations and patient care standards throughout the restructuring process.

RRA Solution

Our teams from healthcare, private credit, financial officers, and technology officers partnered with the Creditors’ Committee starting in mid-2023 to rebuild the company’s board and then leadership team. This comprehensive effort included appointing a chair, full board of directors and multiple C-suite roles, as well as recruiting crucial senior management roles. These placements – a total of 13 to date – have been critical in guiding the strategic direction of the organization as it enters its post-bankruptcy chapter focused on growth.

Challenges we navigated

Stakeholder management of an adhoc Creditors’ Committee comprised of several major shareholders.

Balancing the requirement of individual roles with the entire board composition. We first identified the best chair, followed by five board directors, CEO, and additional C-Suite roles.

Key Takeaways

Processes need to be nimble and dynamic.

Consensus needs to be secured early.

Keep multiple workstreams in mind and sequence them appropriately to secure the best outcome for the owners and company.

Client Fund Situation

As recent inflation compels central banks to raise the cost of debt, businesses previously acquired through buyouts with (relatively cheaper) leverage now face headwinds in being able to reservice debt. Sponsors are increasingly looking towards operational efforts in the form of deep value creation or outright restructurings to support their trouble portfolio companies. As such, credit funds are mirroring their buyout peers in building out their inhouse capabilities.

RRA Solution

We have partnered not only with traditional private equity but with credit arms to build out value creation capabilities. Our best placed candidates come from restructuring or Workout Groups.

What’s next?

With today’s surge in bankruptcies and high volume of restructurings likely continuing throughout 2025, it is clear that some companies will thrive while others will falter.

Appointing a high-performing board is critical to value enhancement post-restructuring. By starting early, thinking clearly about the structure and composition of the board, and thoughtfully compensating and onboarding directors, companies have an opportunity to build a high-performing board that creates strong positive results for the company and its stakeholders.

Authors

Heather Hammond co-leads the Global Private Capital Practice for Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in New York.
Noah Schwarz is a Managing Director and Global Head of Private Credit. He is based in New York.
Emily Taylor co-leads the Global Private Capital Practice for Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in New York and London.
Courtney Byrne is a member of the Private Capital Knowledge team. She is based in London.

Footnotes

1Nick Lazzaro and Annie Sabater. "US corporate bankruptcies soar to 14-year high in 2024; 61 filings in December." S&P Global, 2025. https://spglobal.com
2Jon Weber and Alvaro Aguirre. "7 Deadly Sins of Post-Restructured Boards." Private Directors Association, 2024. https://privatedirectors.org

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices