The AI Mandate: Why CEOs Must Take Responsibility Now | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The AI Mandate: Why CEOs Must Take Responsibility Now

LeadershipTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceChief Executive OfficersExecutive Search

Article

Tuck Rickards

December 14, 2024

3 min

LeadershipTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceChief Executive OfficersExecutive Search

Executive Summary

CEOs are often faced with reactive short-term concerns about AI and need to immerse themselves in where their AI journey can take their business model.

Close

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

Reprinted with permission from Fast Company after originally published on November 14, 2024.

As AI revolutionizes the landscape of larger organizations, many CEOs and boards are still grappling with this profound shift. Tuck Rickards, managing director and co-head of global technology practice for Russell Reynolds Associates, emphasizes that CEOs need to take AI head-on.

“We need to elevate the conversation about AI,” Rickards asserts. CEOs are often faced with reactive short-term concerns about AI and need to take the time to step back and immerse themselves in where their AI journey can take their business model. “The real question is: What are the fundamental opportunities and risks for our business in the long term, and how can AI reshape this vision?” he says.

Harnessing Bottom-up Innovation

Rickards highlights that AI’s transformative impact differs from past technological shifts. “GenAI democratizes technology across entire organizations, empowering individuals at every level.” This accessibility challenges leadership to foster innovation from the ground up within a strategic framework.

AI demands a novel approach, unlike centralized shifts like cloud migration. “Leadership must encourage rethinking and embrace ideas from all levels, investing meaningfully,” Rickards explains. The challenge lies in managing potential chaos by balancing individual innovations with overarching strategy, a task demanding adaptability from C-suite leaders.

AI Transformation: The Four-Step CEO Playbook

Rickards recommends a strategic playbook for AI transformation. First, CEOs should immerse themselves in tech discussions with diverse stakeholders over six to 12 months. “Create an environment for CEOs to engage with stakeholders, systematically exploring tech and transformation agendas,” he suggests. These dialogues should be regular and in-depth with the goal of rethinking the business and framing areas of potential transformation and growth.

Next, CEOs should challenge the C-suite to reimagine their functions enabled through AI and data. “Every team should explore collaboration through data and AI,” Rickards advises, referencing how the go-to-market functions including marketing, sales, and customer success are being transformed through more direct connectivity to the customer. In addition, CEOs need to challenge each of the C-suite leaders to work in a more connected and agile way across functions and to modernize their ways of working as a team.

CEOs also need a board with the skills to constructively challenge the status quo and help see around corners with effective oversight. “High-performing boards should be able to opine on both strategy and operations,” Rickards says.

Finally, Rickards emphasizes the long-term investments in technology and data required to enable AI transformation. As CEOs develop a more forward-looking strategy around AI they often find gaps in their current technology and platforms’ capabilities needed to scale the business.

AI Front-Runners and Followers: Predicting Business Outcomes

Given the massive investments already flowing into AI infrastructure and applications, Rickards imagines there will be meaningful winners in the “AI arms race” such as Nvidia and Microsoft as well as a real shakeout due to the large volume of companies chasing this nascent and emerging market.

Looking at companies across all sectors leveraging AI to drive business transformation, Rickards believes the winners will be those fast companies where the CEO has taken responsibility by orchestrating the most comprehensive learning and experimentation journeys, finding new ways to deliver to the customers, and working inefficiencies out of the system. Rickards anticipates the most immediate impact in data-rich businesses with the potential for meaningful automation and process improvement such as biotech/drug discovery, autonomous driving, smart manufacturing and systems, and consumer digital businesses.

In the long list of questions leaders of large companies should consider, Rickards points to a few as the most critical. “If you’re the CEO of a Fortune 500 company, ask yourself: What is the legacy I want to be handing off in three to five years for this company? Have I engaged my board and teams to think through all the possibilities and to experiment? Finally, am I taking the entire organization on a learning journey, from top to bottom, to build the leadership capabilities needed to win in the future?”

Authors

Tuck Rickards leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice and is an Executive Board member at Fast Company. He is based in San Francisco.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices