Life Beyond CFO: Getting Ahead of Your Next Move | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Life Beyond CFO: Getting Ahead of Your Next Move

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Article

+ 1 author

May 21, 2025

6 min

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

How to plan for and ensure a seamless transition beyond CFO.

Close

Jasmine Jenny

Zurich

Jim Lawson

New York

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Emily Taylor

New York
London

For CFOs considering what’s next, owning their succession and transition plan will benefit the organization but will also be incredibly empowering.

"You need to own your own transition.”

Chris Kreidler
Current board member of Trueblue and former CFO of Sysco

But where do outgoing CFOs begin?

Russell Reynolds Associates interviewed nine former public company CFOs to provide advice on:

Identifying the right opportunity beyond the CFO role

Getting ahead of what’s next

Positioning and communicating a transition

Identifying opportunities beyond the CFO role

Modern CFOs have broad skillsets. In addition to their strong financial skills, they are strategic, focused on talent and of course board literate. Below are the most common opportunities we see outgoing CFOs pursuing and the learnings from these moves.

CEO/General Management: As CFO roles have become more operational and strategic in nature, there are more CFOs moving to CEO.

Board roles: Often on the path to retirement, many CFOs move to non-executive board roles, with a focus on audit committee chair / member.

Operating partner: CFOs are also exploring operating partner roles at private capital firms, as there is an increasing need for advisors to portfolio CFOs.

CEO/General Management

RRA’s CFO Turnover Index shows that 34% of outgoing transitioning CFOs in 2024 took a CEO or President role, up from 20% in 2023.2 The most notable examples of this transition include the CEOs of HSBC, BP, Principal Financial, Campbell’s Co and British American Tobacco.

Despite this aptitude, interviews with former CEOs highlight that many CFOs struggle with visibility and the softer skills necessary to inspire and engage a broad range of stakeholders.

Geraldine Matchett, current board member at Nestlé, ABB and Swiss Re and former CFO and co-CEO at DSM, noted that “CFOs are often seen as the cold voice of data. Becoming an effective storyteller and charismatic leader often requires deliberate effort and training”.

To bridge these gaps and prepare for a successful transition into the CEO role, CFOs must:

Broaden their role

Actively take on projects outside the traditional CFO remit—such as strategy, digital transformation, or operational experience—to build a more rounded leadership profile. Become a true student of the business.

Become a storyteller

Embark on formal training, collaborate with expert coaches, and consistently hone your skills in public speaking and media engagement.

Enhance their relationships

CFOs should also start interacting and building critical relationships with board members, the C-suite and the wider company.

Shift to a CEO mindset

CFOs are used to making data-driven decisions but as a CEO, you are making decisions on imperfect data. While as a CFO, your focus is near term strategic opportunities; as a CEO it shifts to the long term strategy, informed by both internal and external data and other sources.

Board roles

Our interviews revealed that CFOs are uniquely positioned for board roles, such as chair, audit committee chair/member, or qualified financial expert (QFE). Their experience in managing complex financial landscapes, risk assessment, and compliance makes them invaluable, especially as an audit committee member or QFE.

"A robust financial background is essential in today's environment, where good governance increasingly requires technical financial insight. This foundational strength naturally positions CFOs to contribute meaningfully to board-level discussions and decision-making."

Renato Fassbind
Current board member at Nestlé and former CFO of Credit Suisse and ABB

Aspiring board members are encouraged to view board mandates as a long-term goal—one that may take time to secure—rather than a quick transition. To set themselves up for success, they should:

Broaden their expertise

Directors need both depth and breadth. CFOs have a deep understanding of finance, but as directors, they need to be able to engage on a wide range of topics.

Shift from operator to advisor

“Financial acumen is table stakes. If you sit on an audit committee, it’s okay to just be an expert in finance. But a great board member will think like an entrepreneur and engage in strategic discussions.” – Jörg Riboni, current board member of SoftwareONE and former CFO of EMMI.
Throughout our interviews with former CFOs who took board roles, the common thread of shifting from an operator to an advisor rang clear. As CFO, you might have been the person asking all the questions. However, the boardroom requires expert listening skills.

Become an expert relationship navigator

As popular rhetoric goes, the majority of decisions happen after the board meeting—but that only works if you have the pre-established relationships. The best board members listen, navigate C-suite and board relationships expertly, and wield skillful and strategic influence. Investing in good relationships with the board and C-suite early-on is key to honing your influence.

Develop an agile mindset

Finally, in today’s climate, agility is key to being on a board. Regulations and pace have considerably increased. It’s crucial to maintain an up-to-date understanding of these changes and adapting accordingly.

"Technical expertise must be complemented by operational and P&L experience—especially for roles like chair.”

Peter Wuffli
Current board member at Sygnum Bank and former CFO & CEO of UBS

Operating Partner

The operating partner role at private capital firms has gained popularity in recent years amongst former CFOs. The operating partner acts as a specialist who the private capital deal/portfolio operations team can draw upon for functional expertise. They are advising on best practice and structure for finance teams, developing a community and network for portfolio CFOs, and are tasked with mentoring and developing portfolio finance talent.

CFOs who are steeped in value creation, lead through influence, and are relationship experts are well suited to this dynamic role, where you have the flexibility to define the role and the value you add.

To bridge the gap between the CFO and operating partner remit, CFOs should:

Deepen private capital knowledge

Previous experience working with investors, deal structuring, due diligence and value creation is an asset. Understanding where the PE firm is within the deal cycle will be critical to tailoring the mentorship and development offered.

Build a best-in-class finance playbook

As an operating partner, you’ll often be working with portfolio CFOs and CEOs to drive operating improvements and to build best-in-class finance teams; ensure you have a toolkit ready to apply across portfolio companies.

Champion talent development

The ability to leverage assessment tools to benchmark finance talent’s ability to deliver against value creation opportunities, and develop talent accordingly, is foundational to the role.

Influence through relationship building

To succeed as an operating partner, the ability to influence through relationships is critical to one’s success. As an operating partner, you lead through influence rather than authority, with trust being the foundation.

“As an operating partner, you have to work through influence – you no longer have a large team reporting to you, where you can leverage the CFO title and your team to get things done.”

David Edelson
Operating Partner, Bain Capital; Current board member at AutoNation and former CFO of Loews

Getting ahead of what’s next

To transition successfully from CFO to CEO/General Management, board, or operating partner roles requires more than just deep financial expertise. While still in seat, CFOs need to:

Get the right experience

Supplement deep financial expertise with broader business experience to broaden one’s skill set.

Identify any knowledge gaps through proactive learning and strategic relationships — operations, governance, supply chain, cost reduction, and strategy.

If you’re in a trending niche, seize the opportunity.

Build the right network

Cultivate robust relationships with boards, auditors, search consultants, and industry peers.

Actively raise your profile in relevant forums and events, such as the World Economic Forum, CFO conferences and others.

Be patient—securing the right mandate may take a year or longer.

Use networking to craft a narrative that emphasizes your strategic contributions.

Embrace mentorship (it’s a secret weapon)

Seek out mentors who provide candid feedback and challenge your assumptions – career goals are achieved with the right support.

Effective mentorship can highlight blind spots, guide the development of a more assertive communication style, and offer insights into board culture, where speaking up and challenging assumptions is vital.

Positioning and communicating your transition

Once you’ve determined what’s next, factors like timing, role availability, and personal considerations all contribute to how one should communicate a planned transition to the CEO and board.

Create the right dialogue

After a few years into role as CFO at Sysco, Chris Kreidler’s CEO and board sat him down and inquired about what he was looking to do next. While many people’s instincts  might be to keep this information close to their chests, Chris reiterated that being transparent in this conversation significantly benefitted his eventual transition.

While some CEOs and boards might proactively inquire about your career plans, this is by no means the rule. Continually communicating your career goals, and estimated transition timelines will enable you and your organization to develop a succession plan and help you to appropriately scope possible next opportunities, sometimes the best network for your next role are those in your own organization and on your Board.

Consider timing

The timing has to be right for your transition. Ensure that there is a succession plan in place, while also keeping an eye on the market for your next role’s availability. For example, while you might have your eye on the CEO role as a next step, building a candid relationship with the CEO so you know their succession timeline can factor into the your timeline.

Thomas Aebischer, current board member of Solvay, Sika and Dormakaba and former CFO of LyondellBasell & Lafarge Holcim, discussed his transition to Audit Committee Chair. “The transition wasn’t easy, people aren’t waiting around with opportunities and the timing has to be right. It took 1.5 years before I got onto my first board.”

References

1 Is the CFO the Right Next CEO? | Russell Reynolds Associates
2 Global CFO Turnover Index | Russell Reynolds Associates

Authors

Jenna Fisher co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice globally. She is based in Palo Alto.
Jasmine Jenny is a senior member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. She is based in Zurich.
Mohammed Khan is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice globally. He is based in New York.
Catherine Schroeder leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.
Emily Taylor co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Private Capital practice globally. She is based in New York.

Our insights would not be possible without the generous time and input from our esteemed participants.

Thomas Aebischer
Former CFO, LyondellBasell and Lafarge Holcim
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held; Quotient, Dormakaba Holding, Solvay and Sika

David Edelson
Operating Partner, Bain Capital
Former CFO, Loews
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held: AutoNation

Renato Fassbind
Former CFO, ABB and Credit Suisse
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held; HSBC, Swiss Re, Kuehne + Nagel and Nestlé

Ed Fitzpatrick
Strategic Advisor, Genpact
Former CFO, Motorola and Genpact
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held: CBOE Global Markets

Chris Kreidler
Senior Adviser, McKinsey & Co.
Former CFO Sysco
Board Roles Held: TrueBlue, Alyasra Foods, Soul Foods

Geraldine Matchett
Former CFO & Co-CEO, Koninklijke DSM and Former CFO of SGS SA
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held; ABB, Nestlé and Swiss Re

Thomas Müller
Former CFO, Swiss Life and Former CEO, BSI
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held; Twelve Capital, Credit Exchange and Raiffeisen Switzerland

Jörg Riboni
Former CFO, Emmi Gruppe
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held; Erni, Arytza, Heritage B, Hochdorf Holding, Rothorn Group, Glas Trosch and SoftwareOne

Peter Wuffli
Former CFO & CEO, UBS
Board/Audit Committee Roles Held; Elea Foundation, Partners Group, IMD, Zurich Opera and Sygnum Bank

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices