Optimistic, with Exceptions:  Leaders’ Views on Generative AI in 2025 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Optimistic, with Exceptions: Leaders’ Views on Generative AI in 2025

As the generative AI (GenAI) proliferation continues, leaders’ views of this technology can be summarized as optimistic.*

That asterisk is doing a lot of heavy lifting.

In the year since Russell Reynolds Associates last surveyed leaders about their views on GenAI, we hosted over 100 CEOs and CHROs in our AI Leadership Labs roundtable series, where we discussed GenAI’s increasing impact on organizations and the leadership challenges that acceleration presents, uncovering how trailblazing CEOs are developing strategies to tackle the AI opportunity head-on.

Now, five key learnings from our H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor illuminate more about leaders’ increasingly complex views on GenAI.

On one hand, there’s deep enthusiasm: as GenAI implementation progress continues, leaders are seeing significant AI-driven boosts to productivity and revenue, and are slowly gaining confidence in their organization’s GenAI readiness. Yet this optimism is underlined by new leadership challenges—from atrophying critical thinking skills to quality control concerns to AI-driven workforce reductions—that pose serious questions for organizations.

GLM GenAI NarrativeFinding 1
GenAI adoption soars—more than doubling in the last year

Finding 2
Leaders witness significant AI-driven boosts—and expect more impacts in the coming years

Finding 3
Over half of leaders are concerned about GenAI usage stunting critical thinking skills

Finding 4
Leaders value GenAI, but continue to personally struggle with the tech

Finding 5
While still low, leaders’ confidence in their organization’s GenAI capabilities is rising

GenAI adoption soars—more than doubling in last year

Leaders report that GenAI implementation and usage has significantly increased, with nearly half (49%) of leaders reporting piloting (30%) or fully implementing (19%) the tech in their function/team’s day-to-day workflow (Figure 1).

This is a significant increase from last year, when only 8% of leaders reported that they had fully implemented GenAI, and another 21% said they were piloting AI programs. Conversely, the number of leaders who have not taken any steps towards engaging with AI fell significantly—from 33% in H1 2024 to 14% in H1 2025.

Figure 1: H1 2024 vs H1 2025 generative AI implementation progress
% of leaders answering, "To what degree has your function or team implemented generative AI"

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,891 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders; H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,382 CEOs, C-suite, board, and next generation leaders.

Leaders who have successfully implemented GenAI and managed through the subsequent AI transformation tackle the challenge incrementally, starting by supporting the CEO in leading the AI conversation, then integrating AI into all strategic discussions. This is then supplemented by bringing in AI-savvy leadership—from the board of directors down to the factory floor, all with access to AI tools and the requisite training to be successful, and then publicly championing and showcasing their success.

Phase 1
Re-imagine the business | Create CEO Cabinet

Phase 2
Up skill the organization to 30% AI proficiency

Phase 3
Introduce AI Board Talent | AI Functional Hire

Phase 4
Appoint C-Suite Talent with Tech/AI Experience

Phase 5
Acquire or Partner with AI Organizations

Phase 6
Re-assess Leadership Remits | Org Design

Source: Decoding the Future: The RRA Systems View on Leading Through AI Transformation | Russell Reynolds Associates

To learn more about implementation progress by industry, function, and region.

Click here

Leaders see significant AI-driven productivity, skills & capabilities, and process boosts—and they expect more impacts in the coming years

This implementation progress has translated into significant organizational impact.

When we asked leaders to quantify AI-driven impacts on their businesses today, the results were clear: over half of leaders report increases to their team’s productivity (55%) and capabilities (52%) (Figure 2). These increases aren’t specific to leaders whose teams have fully implemented AI—leaders whose implementations are still in-progress (piloting, developing, investigating) also report significant increases on these factors as well.

Approximately one-third of leaders report that AI has increased quality in their organizations’ internal processes (37%) and products/services (30%). Regarding costs, 20% of leaders report that AI has increased their organization’s profitability and 18% say that AI has increased revenue streams. While it’s worth noting that leaders are more likely to report that AI has yet to have an impact on these items (versus a meaningful increase or decrease), we expect this to change as implementation progress continues.

The only item on which leaders were more likely to report AI-driven decreases? Overall headcount. While 8% of leaders reported that AI contributed to increases in their organization’s headcount, 15% said it had decreased the number of employees. This split should be considered via the lens of workforce transformation and its accompanying skillset shifts—while some organizations are bulking up technical capabilities, others (or even the same ones) are looking for opportunities to streamline.

Figure 2: AI-driven organizational impacts today (H1 2025)
% of leaders reporting AI-driven increases/decreases on the following

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,555 CEOs, C-suite, board, and next generation leaders.

As organizations continue their AI-enablement journeys, leaders expect these impacts to be amplified. The implementation progress and the tangible results described above likely both contribute to leaders’ increased enthusiasm around AI’s future impacts on team productivity (up 5pp since last year), new revenue streams (up 6pp), and new jobs (up 7pp).

Where do leaders expect to see future AI-driven impacts in their organizations?
Productivity

of leaders are excited about AI’s potential to dramatically improve team productivity.

Talent strategy

71%
of leaders believe that their organization needs to adjust its talent strategy to better align with their organization’s AI strategy

New revenue streams

0
%

of leaders are excited about AI’s potential to create new revenue streams in their organization.

New jobs

of leaders are believe that AI will create new jobs in their organizations

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,777 CEOs, C-suite, board, and next generation leaders

This enthusiasm prompts important AI transformation questions that executive teams and boards need to answer before they set out to design new revenue streams and talent strategies, including:

- Do you have future-forward advisors on your board with the appropriate skills/knowledge to support the management team?

- How are you re-imagining your future operating model (team structures, workflows, KPIs)?

- How are you ensuring AI governance at every level of your organization?

- Do you intend to reskill your workforce? If so, how?

- Do you need new talent, like a chief AI officer?

Leaders grow more concerned about AI’s long-term implications, as over half express concern about GenAI usage stunting critical thinking skills

Despite the positive impacts noted above, leaders’ views on GenAI aren’t all rosy. Over half of leaders (54%) express concern about individuals failing to develop critical thinking and judgment due to an over-reliance on AI, and a quarter are concerned about AI inadvertently undermining product/service quality (25%) and critical internal process quality (26%).

% of leaders who strongly agree/agree

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,777 CEOs, C-suite, board, and next generation leaders.

Given that 15% of leaders report that AI has already reduced their headcount, it’s perhaps unsurprising that 37% also believe that AI will cause layoffs within their organization in the coming years. What is surprising is how quickly that number increased—a year ago, only 15% of leaders said the same.

We see a similar jump amongst people officers; the number of HR leaders expressing worry about AI-driven layoffs doubled over the last year—jumping from 20% to 40%.

Leaders may have mixed feelings about whether workforce shifts indicate positive or negative organizational impacts. Regardless, it’s important to be sensitive to the culture disruption that headcount changes inevitably cause.

When done right, AI adoption increases the rigor around enterprise data-driven decision making. It’s not about taking shortcuts; AI-enabled operations meaningfully improve an organization’s efficiency, productivity, and collaborative potential. However, leaders need to develop upskilling strategies and governing use principles in tandem to fully realize these benefits.”

Tuck Rickards
Russell Reynolds Associates

Interestingly, when we segment these results by implementation progress—comparing leaders who have fully implemented GenAI, are in-progress implementing the tech, or have not implemented it at all—these concerns remain fairly consistent (Figure 3).

For example, 48% of leaders who haven’t taken any steps towards implementing GenAI express concern about individuals failing to develop critical thinking skills due to over-reliance on AI, which might explain some of their reticence towards engaging with the technology. However, 53% of leaders who have fully implemented the tech say the same—suggesting that the productivity and revenue gains they’ve reported are not without their individual drawbacks.

Figure 3: Leaders’ concerns about AI’s long-term organizational impacts by GenAI implementation stage (H1 2025)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 333 leaders who have fully implemented GenAI, 1185 leaders whose GenAI implementations are in-progress, 246 leaders who have not implemented GenAI.

As with the AI transformation questions noted above, these concerns—as well as others around AI energy consumption, new costs to the business, and managing responsible use—require serious consideration from executive teams and boards.

Leaders’ belief in GenAI’s importance increases, but confidence in their personal AI skills—while improving—remains low

Leaders continue to believe that a strong AI understanding will be mandatory for future C-suite executives, with 82% agreeing. However, only 41% feel confident in their personal ability to implement AI within their organizations.

While this represents increases on both measures from a year ago, it also reveals that a critical leadership skills gap still persists in organizations. This is quite understandable: with the speed at which new AI-enabled offerings are being released and revamped—as well as the long-term concerns noted above—we know many leaders are making decisions about this technology without fully understanding it.

It’s worth remembering that, even as implementations progress and organizations report material AI-driven impacts, leaders should give themselves space and grace to continue learning about the many tools within this rapidly changing landscape.

82%*

of all leaders agree that: “A strong understanding of generative AI will be a required skill for future C-suite members”

*up 6pp since H1 2024

while only

41%**

of all leaders are confident that they have the right skills to implement AI in their organizations.

**up 4pp since H1 2024

Leaders’ confidence in their organization’s AI capabilities is slowly rising

As leaders’ confidence in their personal AI capabilities slowly improves, so too does their view of their organization’s AI skillsets. We observed improving confidence across leaders’ view of their leadership team’s ability to align resources around GenAI (jumping from 35% in H1 2024 to 44% in H1 2025), their board’s AI advisory expertise (20% to 25%), and their employee’s technical skills (27% to 32%) (Figure 4).

We also saw improvements on leaders’ views around their organization’s data quality (31% to 39%), AI safety guidance (27% to 39%), and processes against AI misuse (24% to 32%).

While these numbers are still fairly low—especially considering the meaningful increases in implementation progress—it suggests a trend in the right direction regarding AI upskilling, use cases, and ethical principles development.

Figure 4: Confidence in organizational GenAI capabilities (2024 vs 2025)
% of leaders strongly agreeing/agreeing that their organization has...

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 2,164 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders; H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,580 CEOs, C-suite, board, and next generation leaders.

To learn more about leaders’ confidence in their organizations’ capabilities by industry and function.

Click here

What’s next? Empowering your organization’s AI transformation

The most effective transformations are not siloed—they empower leaders across the organization to drive coordinated, business-wide change.

This requires leaders who take an enterprise approach to AI ownership, usage, and literacy; leaders with incisive views on their current talent pool’s capabilities and are committed to developing future-focused, inclusive succession pipelines; and leaders with high executive potential, who can both navigate change and keep their organizations steady through the day-to-day.

For those looking to take the next step, visit the RRA Systems View for a practical blueprint on leading AI transformation with discipline and intent.

The enterprise of the future: RRA Systems View on leading through AI transformation

Appendix

Learn how implementation progress varies across industry, function, and region

Implementation progress varies by industry, with technology and professional services leading the pack

Unsurprisingly, 30% of leaders in the technology industry report using AI in their day-to-day, with another 31% reporting that they are piloting AI programs (Figure 5).

Professional services and financial services are also making strides—26% of professional services leaders and 24% of financial services leaders report that their teams have implemented GenAI programs, and another 34% and 33% respectively report that they are actively piloting programs.

The healthcare and consumer industries have also made progress on implementation, with 15% of leaders from both sectors reporting that they’ve fully implemented the technology, and over a quarter of leaders from both sectors reporting that they’re piloting GenAI programs.

Only 12% of non-profit leaders and 11% of industrial & natural resources leaders report that their organizations have fully implemented GenAI tools in their day-to-day. However, we expect this to increase as well, as another 29% and 28% of leaders in these respective spaces report that they are piloting GenAI programs.

Of course, each industry has different use cases, customer needs, and steps required to ensure safe implementation, so these differences—while useful to compare across industry—should always be considered within the broader sector context.

Figure 5: GenAI implementation progress by industry (H1 2025)
% of leaders answering, "To what degree has your function or team implemented generative AI?"

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,891 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders.

Technology, HR, and customer activation & growth teams are most likely to have implemented GenAI

Technology officers have made the most progress with GenAI implementation, with 40% reporting that their teams are using it in their day-to-day, and another 31% reporting that they’re piloting the technology (Figure 6). Human resources and customer activation & growth (CAG) leaders are also making progress, with 28% and 24% respectively reporting that their teams are using GenAI in their day-to-day.

Leaders in legal/regulatory/compliance (14%), operations (13%), and finance (9%) are less likely to have fully implemented GenAI. However, it’s worth noting that every function—even those that are more likely to be in the piloting, developing, or investigating phases—have made significant implementation progress in the last  year.

Figure 6: GenAI implementation progress by function (H1 2025)
% of leaders answering, "To what degree has your function or team implemented generative AI?"

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 641 C-level leaders.

Consistent levels of GenAI implementation across regions—but a higher proportion of leaders in APAC have yet to take action

From an overall maturity perspective, the regions are fairly balanced in their implementation progress, with approximately half of leaders across Europe, the Americas, and Asia reporting that they’ve fully implemented or are piloting GenAI programs (Figure 7). However, 24% of leaders in Asia report that they’ve not taken any steps to engage with the technology—while only 13% of leaders in Europe and the Americas say the same.

Figure 7: GenAI implementation progress by region (H1 2025)

% of leaders answering, “To what degree has your function or team implemented generative AI?"

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,891 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders

of leaders in Europe have taken steps toward AI implementation

of leaders in the Americas have taken steps toward AI implementation

of leaders in Asia have taken steps toward AI implementation

Learn more about leaders’ confidence in their organizations’ capabilities by industry and function

Confidence across industries generally follows implementation progress—leaders in tech and professional services are most likely to report confidence in their organization’s leadership teams (54% and 57% strongly agreeing/agreeing, respectively), boards (31% and 35%), and employees (45% and 39%) (Figure 8).

Figure 8: Confidence in organizational GenAI talent capabilities (industry view)
% of leaders strongly agreeing/agreeing that their organization has...

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n=330 consumer leaders, 403 professional services leaders, 298 healthcare leaders, 500 INR leaders, 149 nonprofit leaders, 193 professional services leaders, 291 tech leaders.

Across functions, we again see that confidence in leadership is fairly aligned with implementation progress, with tech officers (who are, unsurprisingly, most likely to be using AI in their day-to-day) reporting the highest levels of confidence in their leadership teams (Figure 9). However, that’s where the correlation ends; leaders have a consistent view regarding the overall employee-base skillset, with no one function deviating more than a few percentage points from the 32% agreement average.

Some of this may be due to exposure: given their proximity in the organization, C-suite leaders have more opportunities to observe and develop confidence in their peers’ AI approach. However, functional leaders do not have consistent exposure to the board or to employees beyond their team—meaning they have fewer chances to develop an informed opinion of these groups’ skillsets.

Figure 9: Confidence in organizational GenAI talent capabilities (functional view)
% of leaders strongly agreeing/agreeing that their organization has...

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor, n=618 C-suite leaders.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.
Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in London.
Tuck Rickards is a senior member and former leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in San Francisco.

The authors wish to thank the 3,000+ leaders from RRA’s global network who completed the H1 2025 Global Leadership Monitor. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2025 and beyond.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices