The Psychological Impact of Succession on the Outgoing CEO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Psychological Impact of Succession on the Outgoing CEO

Career TransitionsSuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersHuman Resources OfficersCEO Succession

Article

Dr. Rebecca Slan Jerusalim

July 22, 2024

3 min

Career TransitionsSuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersHuman Resources OfficersCEO Succession

Executive Summary

Outgoing CEOs face five psychological crossroads during the succession process. We share advice on how to navigate this delicate time.

Close

Dr. Rebecca Slan Jerusalim

Toronto

A version of this article originally appeared in the July-August 2024 magazine issue of Harvard Business Review.

Few single, predictable events are a greater stress test of organizational viability than selecting and transitioning a new CEO. The rewards of getting it right are high—but so are the risks of getting it wrong.

The best practices for handling this process are nearly undisputed: start early so you have time to establish a leadership blueprint, look internally, and develop earmarked candidates, assess their fit with the blueprint, and thoughtfully onboard the chosen successor.

Yet, there is one area that many boards overlook.

For most, the succession process is focused firmly on the incoming CEO—running in such a way that ensures they hit the ground running. But, it's important that boards do not lose sight of another central protagonist in the succession process: the outgoing CEO.

CEOs commit countless hours and personal sacrifice to the top job. So, when an organization takes a procedural approach to succession that solely focused on the incoming CEO, they fail to take into consideration the psychological tensions that outgoing CEOs face during the process.

To better understand what CEOs experience when they hand over the keys, we conducted extended interviews with 30 departing CEOs. Our analysis and synthesis revealed five common psychological crossroads they faced during the succession process—and how to best face them.

Psychological crossroad #1: initiating a succession

Our research found that 83% of successions were CEO-initiated, with the three most-cited reasons for stepping down being: time-bound, thinking of the organization’s future needs, and personal.

The CEOs who initiated succession for time-bound reasons referred to their age or tenure as “feeling right,” though the specific number varied between CEOs. Similarly, for personal reasons, CEOs mentioned they felt accomplished or lacked the focus or energy to continue.

Prior writing typically suggests that CEOs have a hard time letting go because they believe nobody can replace them. In contrast, what precipitated CEOs’ decision to step down was often because they felt their skills did not meet the organization’s future needs or that staying in the role would impede the succession pipeline.

Underpinning CEOs’ willingness to initiate succession was their relationship with the board. When it was strong, more CEOs initiated their succession. Yet, even then, boards were still surprised at the decision, suggesting that although boards spend time discussing succession, there’s little strategic planning about when a CEO might leave.

How outgoing CEOs can navigate this crossroad

CEOs are time-poor and can find it hard, or possibly risky, to begin conversations about their exit from the organization. In many cases, CEOs will avoid the subject until they realize they’re ready to move on, and, in turn, surprise the board. To overcome this, it’s pivotal CEOs maintain a close relationship with the board, where open candid dialogue is welcomed. This will augment the overall succession process.

Psychological crossroad #2: relinquishing control

CEOs began with a great deal of agency when they self-initiated succession. However, this control ebbed and flowed throughout their succession journey. Onboarding aside, which takes place after the successor is chosen, CEOs’ involvement in their succession dwindled significantly, with 23% excluded entirely. Yet once the successor was chosen, their involvement rebounded, as many led their successor’s onboarding.

Although corporate governance experts typically suggest that boards are responsible for succession, CEOs’ involvement in the process is instrumental to its success. When CEOs were heavily involved, they were more confident in their successor’s ability to lead the organization. Among the 10 successors we interviewed whose tenures ended after data collection, the predecessor’s involvement was positively correlated with the successor’s tenure. Out of the six transitions where CEOs left without a successor, five had minimal participation from the outgoing CEO. The greater the participation of the outgoing CEO, the less likely there were defections among the senior executive ranks post-transition.

How outgoing CEOs can navigate this crossroad

A decrease in control is par for the course for an outgoing CEO, and yet it’s a bitter pill to swallow. It’s helpful for CEOs to anticipate what this will feel like, and not try to gain more control without board acceptance. Additionally, knowing that this impacts their psychological need to matter may help illuminate why this period is particularly challenging. Throughout succession, outgoing CEOs should focus on areas where they still have an impact—on themselves, their team, and the organization.

Psychological crossroad #3: managing emotions

During succession, CEOs had to manage others’ reactions as well as their own complex emotions.

When CEOs indicated they wanted to step down, half of the boards were unreceptive (from CEOs’ perspectives). Sometimes, boards pushed back on CEOs and other times, they did not fully respond for long periods of time. Such responses created a sense of angst among CEOs. They also had to manage the doubts of their top team, justify why they were stepping down, and alleviate concerns about what new leadership meant for the team and their organization. Once successors were chosen, outgoing CEOs had to address the frustrations of unsuccessful candidates.

Then there were the CEOs’ own complicated emotions. The period between deciding to step down and when the announcement was made was punctuated by feelings of loneliness and dishonesty for having to keep the news secret. Upon announcing, CEOs experienced a spectrum of emotions. Positively, CEOs felt relieved they no longer had to hide their decision, and some were excited about having the right successor take over.

Negatively, CEOs experienced grief and distress over losing their job, and frustration over their limited involvement with and insight into the succession process. They worried about the successor and the organization’s future. Some felt anticipatory guilt if things went poorly. Primarily, however, CEOs were disappointed and shocked at how quickly they were pushed to the sidelines as allegiances shifted toward the successor. Some CEOs also felt slighted, as their contributions to the organization seemed to be overlooked or overshadowed by the attention showered on the incoming CEO.

Similar to the other crossroads we’ve discussed, the CEO-board relationship had a major effect. When it was strong, boards were more receptive to a CEO’s decision to step down and leaders seemed to cope with their negative emotions better. But even when CEOs self-initiated succession and felt involved in it, they still struggled.

How outgoing CEOs can navigate this crossroad

CEOs should treat emotions as data—instead of suppressing them, lean in and assess the meaning of the emotional experience. Discussing them with trusted outsiders—a coach, peer CEO, CHRO, or spouse—may be useful. Emotions are thought to have no part in the boardroom, but anticipating them, staying attuned to them, and knowing how and where to find support is critical to a positive succession experience.

Psychological crossroad #4: planning for what’s next

Although CEOs are hired for their long-term, strategic capabilities, many do not apply these skills to their personal life. In our research, we found that 53% of CEOs did not plan ahead. While they knew they should consider their next act—not always retirement—the urgency of planning ahead paled in comparison to their day-to-day responsibilities. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the CEOs who did not plan ahead experienced more negative emotions during the transition.

Sometimes, a CEO’s transition does not mean a complete exit. We found that 47% of CEOs were involved with their organization post-handover, including coaching their successor or remaining as a board member (again, more likely to occur when the CEO-board relationship was strong). Although the predecessor’s presence post-exit can be tricky for the new CEO, outgoing CEOs experienced more positive emotions and fewer top team members left when the departing CEO remained in some capacity.

How outgoing CEOs can navigate this crossroad

Recognize that not everybody needs a plan—some CEOs were comfortable experimenting with a blank canvas. However, having varied interests is certainly helpful during this period. Regardless, the next act should not be decided in haste, the CEO should focus on their intrinsic purpose, and consider their spouse or family’s expectations.

Psychological crossroad #5: detaching from the role and the organization

The psychological relationship CEOs have with the title can impact how they disengage from the role. There was a comparable split between those who viewed CEO as their job (43%) versus their identity (47%); the remainder felt it was both. Although many CEOs knew it was dangerous to entangle their identity with the role, this melting pot process often occurs naturally—as they do their job and as others reinforce their identity as CEO.

Thus, the CEO identity is a double-edged sword. When CEOs viewed the role as part of their identity, they were more likely to have a strong relationship with the board, which positively impacted succession. At the same time, those CEOs also experienced more negative emotions, because transitioning meant losing their professional identity.

How outgoing CEOs can navigate this crossroad

The CEOs who could distance their identity from the role had a humble, servant leadership style, often referring to their position being on the bottom of the organizational chart or identifying with who they were outside of their job. While emotions were still complex, they tended to be more adjusted to their life post-exit. CEOs should also recognize they will be quickly forgotten as the organization moves on to new leadership. To cope with this new reality, look for support from coaches, peers, and others with lived experience.

The bottom line

When the CEO-board relationship is strong, all psychological crossroads are easier to manage. Developing these relationships should be a daily priority for the incumbent and board during every phase of a CEO’s journey.

Author

Rebecca Slan Jerusalim is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. She is based in Toronto.
Navio Kwok is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in Toronto.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsLeadership StrategiesCulture RiskDevelopment and Transition

What Aspiring C-suite Leaders Need to Know About “Being Available”

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices