Executive Mentoring: Lonely at the Top No More | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Executive Mentoring: Lonely at the Top No More

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryDevelopment and Transition

Article

Symon Elliott

August 15, 2024

3 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

We share the four ways executive mentors can help set CEOs up for success in the short and long term.

Close

Symon Elliott

London
New York

A version of this article originally appeared in Directors and Boards.

One of a board's most important responsibilities is setting up their new CEO for success, ensuring the arduous work of the succession and selection process truly pays off.

This is becoming a critical duty, as today's CEOs face an increasingly complex operating environment—tasked with delivering on the growing expectations of stakeholders, while also navigating uncertainty in a world spinning faster than ever.

We know many CEOs are feeling overwhelmed and underprepared. Our research shows that CEOs' perceptions of their leadership team's readiness to face key external threats, such as uncertain economic growth, key talent availability, tech change, geopolitical uncertainty, and increased regulation, has begun to wane, falling an average of 5.6 percentage points in the past six months.

As boards know all too well, the runway CEOs have to achieve success is short. In these high-stakes moments, how can boards give their CEOs the best chance of succeeding? And what can be done to prepare the next generation of CEOs for the role?

Increasingly, we see boards turning their attention toward executive mentoring as a tool to support CEO transitions. Executive mentors can offer invaluable advice that CEOs will struggle to find elsewhere. These mentors are typically leaders who have sat in the CEO seat, faced similar challenges, and know how best to guide companies through inevitable storms.

We've seen how powerful executive mentoring can be for some of the most well-known CEOs. Facebook's founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg, for example, shared that Apple founder Steve Jobs helped him reconnect with his original mission when things weren't going so well for Facebook in the early days. Bill Gates credits Warren Buffett as someone who influenced him to not only prioritize and manage his time more effectively, but also to make his mark in philanthropy on global issues like poverty and disease.

Of course, mentoring stands the greatest chance of success when CEOs have a growth mindset. While CEOs may feel like they've reached the pinnacle of their careers when they take the top job, the learning curve is far from over. They must grasp the idea that “what got you here won't get you there.” The good news is that, overall, CEOs appear ready to embrace mentorship: 71% said mentoring could have been better incorporated during their transition into the role.

Here, we set out four ways that mentors can set leaders up for success in the short and long term.

Accelerating the performance of new-in-role CEOs

CEOs are operating in a high-paced, high-pressure environment, one where failed CEO appointments are becoming more frequent. In 2023, more than 15% of CEOs appointed to the world's largest companies were considered failed appointments—meaning they lasted less than two years in the role—up from an average of 9.6% since 2019.

No CEO enters the role as the perfect package. CEOs need to keep raising their games—and have their thinking constructively challenged—for the good of their organizations. This is where an executive mentor is key. A mentor can challenge a CEO's viewpoint, offer a new perspective, and forensically pinpoint areas where the CEO can increase performance (for example, how to resolve a crisis, spearhead a takeover, or identify markets to accelerate growth).

Easing loneliness and aiding decision-making

The CEO role is incredibly lonely. Not only are there no longer peers to spar with intellectually, but they are often unable to share the ins and outs of what they're working on with anyone. In a 2012 Harvard Business Review study, half of CEOs reported feelings of loneliness and 61% believed that it hindered their performance.

Executive mentors can provide a sounding board in moments of loneliness, a place to share ideas before they are put in front of the board or C-suite team. When a mentoring relationship is fostered correctly, CEOs will gain full trust in their mentor. Mentors will instill the confidence to navigate complex trade-offs to reach the right decision. After receiving executive mentorship, 69% of CEOs said that they were better at making decisions.

Mitigating risks and recovering from failure

While CEOs are unlikely to ever have all the answers in today's rapidly evolving business environment, enlisting an executive mentor can help them anticipate issues with greater accuracy. CEO data from Harvard Business Review, for example, found that 84% of CEOs credited mentors with helping them avoid costly mistakes.

A critical part of a mentor's role is to not just mitigate risks but also to hold a mirror up to the CEO. They can identify any weaknesses and blind spots, increase their self-awareness amidst missteps and make them accountable for their decisions or behaviors. Very few people will feel comfortable having those conversations, but a mentor has an invaluable, unbiased perspective, which often means it's well-received by the CEO. A mentor can also work with a CEO to effectively recover from a mistake, learn from it, and stop it from happening again.

Providing high-potential leaders with the vital ingredients to succeed

Mentoring isn't just critical for CEOs who are new to the role, but also for high-potential leaders who are being considered for succession. Future CEOs should step into the role with confidence amidst a smooth transition. One way of doing this is through guided mentorship from someone who has walked a similar path to the top. Mentors can not only position candidates for success in securing the top seat, but they can also transfer critical tacit knowledge on the more intangible aspects of leadership, like making decisions amidst uncertainty, managing complex team dynamics, and having uncomfortable conversations.

There's a knock-on benefit, too: Sending a clear signal to potential CEO candidates and next-generation leaders that the organization is committed to their development will aid retention and prime a pipeline of future-ready CEOs.

Ultimately, by investing in executive mentoring, directors are setting the stage for sustained success in today's dynamic business environment. The impact of executive mentoring extends far beyond individual leaders. It permeates the entire organization, creating a culture of continuous improvement and driving long-term success.

Executive Mentoring

A structured program of performance-led mentoring with leadership development at its core.

Find out more

Authors

Symon Elliott leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global CEO Mentorship Program. He is based in London.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices