Navigating the Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Navigating the Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today

LeadershipHealthcareFinance OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Article

November 09, 2023

4 min

LeadershipHealthcareFinance OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

In the face of a challenging market, biotech executive teams have an opportunity to align and bolster their finance teams.

Close

Yvonne Lu

San Francisco
Boston

Rose Mistri Somers

New York
Boston

Nick Roberts

San Francisco

In stark contrast to the record-breaking events and IPO boom of 2021, the 2023 biotech market now grapples with distinctly different challenges.

In a sample of 570 US biotech organizations, 40% are currently trading below cash.1 Furthermore, although venture capital investments in the biotech market peaked in 2021, investments and the number of deals have since seen a consistent decline (Figure 1.)

As the market continues to change, the finance team needed to navigate it is also evolving. Recent Russell Reynolds Associates research found that over half of biotech leaders are reevaluating or acknowledging the need for change. What’s more, 44% of all US biotech CFOs are in the role for the first time, showing how much change this market has already weathered (N=390).2

Source: RRA Analysis of Biotech Venture Capital Investments and Deal Count, 2019-Q2 2023, Pitchbook

As biotechs move to execute their organizational strategies, the CFO and finance team have a critical role to play. To gain a better understanding of how finance teams are navigating today’s challenging market conditions, we surveyed 84 CEOs, CFOs, and audit committee chairs (ACCs) of biotech organizations. Consistent with the overall US biotech market, 42% of our respondents’ organizations have a first-time CFO.

Themes gathered from survey respondents suggested that:

Due to a changing market dictating needs for broader skill sets, over half of biotech leaders don’t think they have the right skills on their current finance teams. Finance leaders must have depth across business development, capital markets activities, and investor relations to position themselves as a holistic business partner to the CEO and C-suite.

Nearly half of biotech CEOs and CFOs anticipate needing funding within the next six months.

Biotechs are actively pursuing non-dilutive funding via business development activities while cementing investor relationships and support.

CFOs and other leaders are sometimes misaligned on the finance team’s capabilities and enterprise-wide influence.

Due to a changing market dictating needs for broader skill sets, over half of biotech leaders don’t think they have the right skills on their finance teams

Based on the current strategic priorities for many biotechs, CEO and audit committee chair respondents acknowledge that there is a need for change in the finance team’s skills. Over 50% of respondents are re-evaluating the skills they need or acknowledging that there is a need for change in some of the finance team’s skills (Figure 2).

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

The biotech realm mandates skills in corporate, business development, capital markets, and investor relations, yet this is also where the most significant gaps amongst finance teams appear (Figure 3). One-third (33%) of respondents noted a gap in their finance team’s corporate and business development skills, and 29% noted a gap in capital markets and investor relations skills.

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

Many firms address these voids by relying on external advisors and hiring new team members (Figure 4). Given the size of many early-stage biotech companies, many are opting to hire external advisors who specialize in business development, investor relations, and tax, as they aren’t large enough to sustain these niche roles.

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

Nearly half of biotech CEOs and CFOs anticipate needing funding within the next six months

Respondents to our survey underscored the pivotal roles that CEOs and CFOs play when it comes to financing, with outside advisors and general counsel also considered to be important stakeholders. However, opinions can differ slightly on the timing for the next round of financing.

CEOs and CFOs agree that there is an urgency around financing needs. All of the biotech CEOs we surveyed anticipated needing additional funding within the next two years, and 43% said it would be needed within the next six months (Figure 5). Their CFO counterparts responded in a less conservative manner, with only 37% anticipating a need for funding within six months, 51% in the next one to two years, and 12% in the next three to five years.

The urgency around funding is driving biotechs to be creative when it comes to advancing their companies' strategies, including a renewed focus on pursuing business development.

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

Biotechs are actively pursuing non-dilutive funding via business development activities while cementing investor relationships and support

Nearly three-quarters of our respondents do not have a commercialized lead asset. Within that, 19% are currently operating in a pre-clinical environment, while 37% of respondents say their lead asset is in Phase I or Phase II and 14% say they have a lead asset in Phase III of development. In the absence of a revenue-generating product, and satisfying the urgency for funding, companies are focusing on business development and investors to advance their company’s strategy.

According to our respondents, 85% of biotechs are currently focused on capital-raising activities via potential M&A and strategic partnerships, 81% are securing new investors, and 69% are strengthening relationships with existing investors. Internal initiatives focused on capital preservation, such as re-evaluating program portfolios and streamlining the workforce are also on biotech leaders’ minds but are not top initiatives as they work to optimize capital (Figure 6).

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

CFOs and other stakeholders are sometimes misaligned on the finance team’s capabilities and enterprise-wide influence

While biotechs are pursuing new business development opportunities and working on developing and strengthening their investor relationships, respondents suggested that finance team’s potential impact could be bolstered.

Nearly half (46%) of CEOs felt that their current finance team did not meet the needs of the company’s external positioning and IR needs, especially critical right now given fundraising needs. On the other hand, CFOs view themselves as more well-connected with the investor community than other stakeholders perceive them, with nearly half of other stakeholders seeing this as an area for improvement (Figure 7).

There are less drastic differences in opinions when it comes to cash forecasting and management and board engagement. CFOs view this as critical and hold their teams to higher standards than other respondents.

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

In addition to the differing perceptions around the finance team’s skills, perhaps unsurprisingly, CFOs see their finance teams as exerting more influence over enterprise-wide decisions than other stakeholders (Figure 8).

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

Similarly, CFOs are more likely to say their involvement with the CEO and audit committee chair hasn’t changed in this new market, versus the latter saying it has (Figure 9a and 9b). CEOs and audit chairs are more involved in financial decisions due to pressing market conditions; unsurprising, given that 44% of biotech CFOs are in the role for the first time.2

Source: RRA, Navigating Current Biotech Market Conditions: The Finance Team for Today, 2023, n=84, Biotech Executives and Senior Leaders

How to enable your finance team to navigate today’s biotech market

Per our Global Leadership Monitor, CEO confidence in their leadership team’s capability to lead the organization successfully has continued to decline over the last six months. To bridge gaps regarding expectations, effectiveness, and confidence in biotech finance teams’ capabilities, we suggest several solutions:

Assess and develop finance leadership skills

Your company’s success hinges on its financial leadership. Therefore, impartial methods to assess and develop your finance team are critical. Assessing your finance team can help to increase the success rate of your executive appointments and accelerate the development of your rising leaders.

Identify the right finance team for today’s market

Given the strategic priorities of biotech companies today and these assessment results, take stock of whether your finance team has the capabilities and skills to meet your company's strategic priorities. If not, consider investing in the development of your finance team or hiring externally for heavy hitters with multiple niche skills (CAO, IR, etc.).

Find in the right mentors for your finance talent

A newly appointed CFO will be challenged beyond anything they have experienced earlier in their career. With a significant number of biotech CFOs in the role for the first time, not only are they being challenged beyond their previous career, but they are also currently facing a volatile market with distinct challenges. The value of a trusted, independent mentor, or audit committee chair who brings specific executive experiences and has faced similar challenges is invaluable.

Accelerate team effectiveness

How can you become more aligned as a team, effectively communicating and driving strategic objectives? A cohesive understanding between CEOs and CFOs regarding funding needs will help to maintain transparency and credibility with investors. As a united front, they can effectively communicate the biotech company’s financial position, funding requirements, and growth plans to enhance investor confidence and attract potential investors.

References

1 Russell Reynolds Associates CapIQ analysis of US Biotech organizations, N= 570, 2023

2 Russell Reynolds Associates US Biotech CFO analysis, N = 390, 2023

Authors

Yvonne Lu co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Biopharma practice. She is based in San Francisco.

Rose Mistri-Somers is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Financial Officers Practice. She is based in New York.

Nicholas Roberts is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Financial Officers Practice. He is based in San Francisco.

Catherine Schroeder leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Toronto.

Cameron Findlater is a member of the Healthcare Knowledge team at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in New York.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices