S&P 500 CFO Turnover Persists, Gaining Momentum After Sluggish Start | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

S&P 500 CFO Turnover Persists, Gaining Momentum After Sluggish Start

Career TransitionsFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 1 author

February 09, 2024

5 min

Career TransitionsFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We analyzed CFO turnover trends to help your organization mitigate risk, retain top finance leaders, and plan for the future.

Close

Linda Barham

Chicago

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Jim Lawson

New York

Clare Metcalf

Chicago

Russell Reynolds Associates’ latest analysis of CFO turnover in the S&P 500 finds that CFOs continue to be flight risks. At the end of 2023, CFO turnover ticked slightly above 2022’s departure rate, after an unseasonably active latter half of the year. Analyzing the CFOs of S&P 500 organizations from 2019 to end of 2023 (N=500), we learned:

1. After a slow start to the year, S&P 500 CFO turnover increased to slightly above 2022 levels

2. The majority of newly appointed CFOs (66%) are in the role for the first time

3. More women CFOs are coming from outside the organization, as internal talent is scarce

4. Increased CEO turnover continues to result in CFOs taking the top seat

After a slow start to the year, S&P 500 CFO turnover increased to slightly above 2022 levels

After a sluggish start, followed by turnover in the latter half of the year, CFO turnover has reached 17.4%, slightly below a record high in 2021 (Figure 1a. and b.), with significant activity in the financial services and industrial and natural resources sectors (Figure 2).

As the S&P 500 market slowed from its 2021 high, Fortune 1000 turnover simultaneously increased from 17% to 19% in 2023, driven by increases in S&P MID CAP 400 and SMALL CAP 600 turnover. This may provide opportunities to next-generation S&P 500 finance talent; as these leaders eye their next move, a first-time CFO opportunity at a smaller organization might be enough to lure them away.

Figure 1a. Trending CFO Turnover

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of 2023, N= 500
Note: 15 of the first time CFOs are interim

Figure 1b. Trending Number of S&P 500 Newly Appointed CFOs

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of August 2023, N= 500
Note: 7 of the first time CFOs are interim

Figure 2. Trending Turnover by Sector

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of 2023, N= 500
Note: 15 of the first-time CFOs are interim

The majority of newly appointed CFOs are in the role for the first time

This year, 66% of new CFOs were in the role for the first time, largely due to internal succession plans coming to fruition (Figure 3). While many organizations are open to embracing people with different tenures and experiences, those hiring externally in our difficult market are increasingly looking for proven experience as exhibited by the increase in external sitting CFO hires (900 basis points YoY).

Figure 3. Internal versus External Appointments

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of 2023, N= 500
Note: 15 of the first-time CFOs are interim

More women CFOs are coming from outside the organization, as internal talent is scarce

More women have been appointed to the top financial job than ever before, as women now hold 18% of CFO roles in the S&P 500. Organizations without a gender-diverse bench are looking externally for more talent, typically recruiting experienced women CFOs. In fact, in 2023, 47% of women’s CFO appointments were externally promoted, versus only 30% of men (Figure 4). These increases in external appointments indicate that, while we’re slowly closing the CFO gender parity gap, efforts to increase gender diversity at organizations are still in their nascent phase. While diverse internal pipelines are becoming more robust, they haven’t yet been developed to the senior level.

As of the end of 2023, we are still 45 years from a representation CFO landscape—doubling down on developing women in finance within organizations will be key to achieving gender parity.

Figure 4. Internal versus External Women CFO Appointments

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of 2023, N= 500
Note: 15 of the first-time CFOs are interim

Increased CEO turnover continues to result in CFOs taking the top seat

CFOs are increasingly being considered as succession candidates for the CEO role. Similarly to 2022's record numbers, CFOs were 3x more likely to transition into the top seat this year than they were in 2021. If these leaders don’t move directly into the top seat, they often do a stint as a division CEO or as COO to get familiar with operations before assuming the CEO position. Luckily, the majority are doing so in their own organization (Figure 5).

Figure 5a. 2023 CFO Exits

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to end of year 2023, N= 500
Note: 15 of the first-time CFOs are interim

Figure 5b. Number of departing CFOs per new role
Of the CFOs transitioning beyond finance, they are more likely to transition to CEO/President or Division CEO roles

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to end of year 2023, N= 500
Note: 15 of the first-time CFOs are interim

Retirement rates jumped year over year, with 51% of departing CFOs retiring — a 400 basis points increase since 2022 (Figure 6). This is the highest rate of CFO retirement we’ve observed in the past five years, and we expect this trend to continue (or even increase) in the next few years, as 27% of S&P 500 CFOs are currently 59 or older.

Figure 6. Trending CFO Departures

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of 2023, N= 500
Note: 15 of the first-time CFOs are interim

Do you know your CFO’s career goals?

As organizations increasingly prefer the weight of an experienced CFO and more CFOs eye the top role, do you know your CFO’s future plans? To mitigate the potential threat of turnover and poaching, RRA recommends the following strategies to retain top finance talent.

Engage in ongoing career development conversations

With CFOs increasingly eyeing the CEO role, take stock of their viability as potential CEO successors. Understand the key competencies they need to possess to move into the top seat and identify whether that includes expanding their current role or taking a brief stint as COO or a division president/CEO to develop these competencies. Beyond the CFO, engage with next-generation talent, as increasing turnover at the S&P MID CAP 400 and SMALL CAP 600 has created opportunities for next-generation CFO talent who are ready now.

Re-evaluate compensation

As experienced CFOs continue to be in demand during an economic downturn, evaluate whether your compensation package is competitive. Sourcing market intelligence on what similarly-sized companies in your industry offer can be enlightening. Don’t let a slightly more competitive package lure your CFO talent away.

Plan for retirement

Over the past five years, the average age of CFOs who retired or exclusively took board roles was 59. Don’t be afraid to open a dialogue around their plans for retirement based on career conversations.

Continue to invest in succession planning

After engaging in career planning conversations with your CFO, re-assess your finance talent succession plan to ensure both timelines align. Given the lack of a gender-diverse pipeline, pay specific attention to developing and retaining women finance talent. There’s always room to improve: consider whether you are looking deep enough into your organization, the soundness of your assessment and development methodologies, and your overall transition plan.

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Americas Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Chicago.

Jenna Fisher co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Palo Alto.

Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. He is based in New York.

Clare Metcalf is a member of the Financial Officers Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in Chicago.

Catherine Schroeder leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Toronto.

S&P 500 CFO Turnover Persists, Gaining Momentum After Sluggish Start

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Additional RRA Reading

Is the CFO the Right Next CEO?

Looking to create optionality in CEO succession planning – consider the CFO. Here, former CFOs share what it takes to transition to the CEO role.

Global Leadership Monitor

A  bi-annual global report that tracks key threats to organizational health and leadership preparedness to face them

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices