Cracking the Code on C-suite Succession:  A Roadmap for Chief People Officers | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Cracking the Code on C-suite Succession:  A Roadmap for Chief People Officers

Chief Executive OfficersHuman Resources OfficersBoard of DirectorsC-Suite Succession

Article

+ 2 authors

October 27, 2023

1 min

Chief Executive OfficersHuman Resources OfficersBoard of DirectorsC-Suite Succession

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

C-suite succession is crucial but challenging for leaders. Only 43% of CPOs believe their organization has a successful strategy.

Close

Morgan Dyson

San Francisco

Dee Fitzgerald

Sydney

Lilly Lin

Chicago

Corrado Menghini

Zurich

Anna Penfold

London

The tumult of the last three years proved that strong
C-suites are more important than ever.

It seems then, that
C-suite succession would be a top priority for all leaders.
Additionally, most chief people officers (CPOs) believe
it to be one of the hardest parts of their jobs. In fact, our
Global Leadership Monitor shows that only 43% of CPOs
think that their organization has a successful strategy for
leadership succession at the C-level, suggesting serious
room for improvement. At the same time, boards are seeking
increased visibility on succession planning efforts below the
CEO level. The challenge for CPOs lies in creating a more
strategic and systematic approach to C-suite succession in
the context of a rapidly changing environment and workforce.

Succession planning is tough. It is one of the hardest
things I do in the organization.”

You go through talent planning, and you talk about
bench strength, but when that job actually comes open,
let’s be honest: things can go sideways."

There is a strong upside to getting this right. A healthy C-suite
talent pipeline not only minimizes risk and disruption, but
also enhances business continuity, pace and agility, while
lowering costs and increasing employee morale. Yet, it remains
an important but elusive part of an organization’s strategic
planning efforts.

Organizations that get a leader they know and hopefully
love end up being more stable. You avoid a lot of
uncertainty and cost.”

We view succession planning from a risk management
perspective—if someone leaves, we have someone to
replace them with.”

The focus and commitment to development has been
very well received by our workforce. We have a higher
level of engagement.”

While a great succession planning system is critical,
several factors differentiate a great approach from
a merely good one. RRA spoke with almost 30 CPOs
and board members across the globe to understand the
state of C-suite succession planning in their organizations
better. Insights from these conversations—along with
expertise gathered from the almost 400 succession-related
assignments RRA has completed in the last three years—have informed this report. We gathered insight that we hope
will help CEOs, boards, and CPOs to uncover:

The unique differentiators of effective C-suite succession
planning

The common challenges with C-suite succession planning
and how to solve for them

Advice when embarking on this journey

This report will largely focus on what great succession
planning looks like at mature (medium to large) organizations,
but please refer to page 12 for advice for scaling or high
growth organizations.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Global Leadership Monitor; N=52 CPOs

Cracking the Code on C-suite Succession:  A Roadmap for Chief People Officers

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices