Five Ways Leaders Can Navigate an Increasingly Politicized Business Ecosystem | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Five Ways Leaders Can Navigate an Increasingly Politicized Business Ecosystem

Leadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryCorporate Affairs and Communications OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance Officers

Article

June 17, 2024

3 min

Leadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryCorporate Affairs and Communications OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance Officers

Executive summary

We look at the shifting interaction between politics and business, and share five ways leaders can navigate an increasingly politicized business ecosystem.

Close

Political dynamics are constantly shifting, with the continuation of the Ukraine War; instability from the effects of the Israel-Gaza conflict; the anticipation of high-stakes elections across 76 countries; and uncertainty around China’s economy, as well as its national security and trade competition implications.

The pressing issue of climate and environmental challenges, increasingly effective activist pressures on corporations, and other social causes also impact political dynamics. Leaders can no longer afford to retroactively think about political risk when a specific event occurs, or view it in a vacuum.

45% of leaders rate geopolitical uncertainty as a top-five threat to organizational health.

Given these interacting issues, it’s unsurprising that our Global Leadership Monitor found that 45% of leaders rate geopolitical uncertainty as a top-five threat, an 8-percentage point increase from six months ago. What’s more, it’s a threat leaders feel least prepared to address.

The traditional view of political risk is obsolete. Nearly everything has changed—power dynamics have transformed, transparency is expected, and government intervention has increased. Above all, the fundamentally political perspective on the role of business in society has evolved. Yet only 27% of organizations say they are developing new leadership skills to address the evolving political landscape in the long term. It’s critical for leaders to recognize that they are now operating in a highly political business ecosystem and focus on developing the capabilities to evaluate their business strategy and operations through a political lens.

The interaction between politics and business

While business has always considered the broader political backdrop, that backdrop is now a fast evolving tapestry made up not just of government positions and political parties, but also of customers, employees, external partners, and numerous other stakeholders across various communities. Increasing digitalization also amplifies and polarizes this politicized ecosystem; information and opinions (regardless of their veracity) are quickly disseminated, and tools to engage in everyday activism are more accessible. Broadly speaking, politics—the expression of values and beliefs about how society should operate— must now be central to business leaders’ priorities.

Examples of how issues are increasingly driven by political perspectives

Social and cultural issues

At the height of the pandemic, wearing masks in the US was not merely a matter of public health or civic courtesy, but also became a symbol of political allegiance. Instituting mask mandates were anything but simple; businesses needed to understand the political implications of these policies. Business goals’ impacts on society and culture must also be considered. For example, an Australian mining company faced public denouncement for destroying an ancient Aboriginal site when they expanded their operations. Attempts to repair the organization’s brand and image have been extensive, including replacement of the CEO, the chair of the board, two senior executives and a board member. This incident also increased investor pressure on the industry to address heritage management practices.

Geographical concerns

At its core, globalization is a socio-cultural phenomenon, and is naturally intertwined with geographical concerns. Consulting firms and multinational organizations—which have grown tremendously via globalization—are now dealing with the complexities that come with having a significant presence in all corners of the world, particularly in countries that are going through their own economic and political difficulties. These companies now need to reconcile their work, advice, and clients with the reputation they strive to have.

Technological advancement

There is an increasing demand for technology companies to take responsibility for unintended usages and consequences from their products and services. Most recently, twenty notable technology companies—including Microsoft, Google, and Meta—have committed to ensuring that their products and services are not interfering with elections, and The Center for Countering Digital Hate has generated a report to ensure accountability. Technology companies that have not made this commitment and fail to block false images or, worse, generate misleading content, will find themselves in poor market standing.

Economic uncertainty

It’s no surprise that economic uncertainty fluctuates with political platforms and cultural expectations—the political institution in seat will impact the economy and, in turn, business strategies. This interaction is currently at play in China, as leaders explore various ways to revive its economy. Not only will businesses have to decide how to partner or invest with China, but they will also need to develop a perspective on China’s cultural exceptionalism and government, as operating in a single-party state brings fundamentally different implications from operating in a democratic environment. Political perspectives and government actions are becoming ever more relevant to market movements, and their impacts are becoming less predictable. In addition the recent immigration flow into Western countries will have both an economic impact (inflation, productivity metrics, and government budgets), as well as continued cultural impacts (opportunities for low-skilled migrants, increase in diversification and specialization, and living standards).

These examples illustrate the cultural disruption businesses are facing. As expectations change around the role of business in society, organizations need to demonstrate how their purpose, business model, and growth strategy coexists with developing social mores. If businesses are unable to integrate a political perspective into their strategy and operations and tangibly demonstrate their responsibility to the communities in which they operate, they open themselves to additional risk and uncertainty.

Adopting a political perspective for effective decision-making

Only 36% of leaders feel it’s important for the CEO to speak out on political and social issues their employees care about.

While there was a period in which CEOs and business leaders were under pressure to speak out publicly, and many did, this appears to have now settled down. Only 22% of leaders think that employees expect the organization to take a stance on political issues that don’t immediately relate to the business. Even when considering stated employee priorities, only 36%  of leaders feel it is important for the CEO to speak out on political and social issues their employees care about.

While leaders are not expected to speak up on every issue, they should not make the mistake of becoming politically disengaged. Instead, leaders need to evolve their understanding of the new political risk equation, as well as the intricacies of effectively engaging with and responding to specific issues within a politicized ecosystem.

To address this, organizations should evolve to become politically-skilled. This requires leaders to learn how to view their business through a political lens, understand divergent and conflicting sociopolitical views, and judiciously enhance business strategy amidst these dynamics.

While it isn’t necessary for organizations to associate themselves with a particular set of issues, they need to proactively develop a unifying, strategic perspective on how they engage with societal issues, international relations, domestic politics, and global factors that impact their specific ecosystem of societal good, employee sentiment, investor/shareholder priorities, public opinion, and business operations.

This may seem like a tall order when everyday operational challenges are simultaneously demanding attention. Yet leaders who are skilled at such political thinking are better at making effective, cohesive decisions and maintaining a resilient, strategic mindset, which consequently contributes to smoother and more effective operational performance.

Some organizations—political champions—may be interested in taking a direct position and publicly advocating for issues that are important to the business, employees, and/or their targeted consumers. Political champions do not engage in ad-hoc, seasonal issues; their political perspectives are built into the business’ DNA.

Notable champions include:

Patagonia: Embedded environmental and societal values in business practices and consistently engages in advocacy efforts on climate change and public lands conservation.

Chick-fil-A: Associated with conservative values; leadership is publicly involved in philanthropy and advocacy aligned with their beliefs.

Ben & Jerry’s: Outspoken about social justice issues and uses products and marketing to promote social and political causes.

Only 43% of CEOs feel they have the support and expertise internally to help them navigate political issues.

Political champions can either be vocal (engaging in public advocacy or lobbying efforts) or quiet (demonstrating their stances through the types of vendors they work with, external organizations they partner with, or how they support their employees or customers).

One potential barrier in becoming a politically-skilled organization (or, if relevant, a political champion) is a capability gap at the top. Even though 80% of CEOs are clear on what issues they need to speak up on, only 43% of CEOs feel they have the support and expertise internally to help them navigate political issues.

How can leaders effectively operate in an increasingly politicized business ecosystem?

We spoke with Dr. Joe Zammit-Lucia, an expert on business leadership in contemporary culture, public speaker, and author of The New Political Capitalism: How Businesses and Societies Can Thrive in a Deeply Politicized World. He shared five recommendations for leaders to effectively navigate an increasingly politicized business ecosystem:

Recognize that there is a new political paradigm. Traditionally, business leaders have not had to look at their businesses through a socio-political lens because it wasn’t a necessity. Business schools didn’t (and mostly still don’t) teach how to look at businesses as political actors, in addition to commercial and economic actors. However, leaders who can develop these skills and new perspectives will be more effective, successful, and resilient in our politicized ecosystem.

Embrace the spirit of learning. To stay abreast of evolving political sentiment, leaders need to embrace the spirit of learning regarding how their organizations can continue to provide value in a highly politicized world. It is not enough to try to be on the “correct side” of the short-term socio-cultural virtue signaling. Leaders are now expected to think critically about how they can provide net value beyond financial capital, including social, political, human, knowledge, environmental, and institutional capital.

Understand how issues are relevant to the business. Leaders aren’t expected to publicly engage with every issue. When leaders do take a stance on specific topics, they should do so with clarity on how engaging with these issues will impact stakeholder experience with the business. The challenge is to be proactive. Organizations should not merely act in response to activist pressure, engage with the hot topic of the day just for the sake of it, or delegate fundamentally political topics to a remote department—these actions relegate strategic questions into simplistic tick-box exercises. Instead, organizations need a solid understanding of how their business strategy and operations align with the ever-evolving socio-political environment.

Amplify integrity and transparency in decision-making. Actions speak louder than words. When leaders “declare their values,” they need to ensure that these values are reflected in their business’ strategy and operations. An empty declaration of support is a surefire way to incite activists to examine every aspect of your business, and practices that misalign with values are certain to be uncovered.

Strengthen cultural leadership skills. With stakeholders holding a wide range of values and beliefs, business leaders are more likely to find themselves in situations where it is important to “build a coalition of everybody.” This is a leadership capability which many have still yet to build in this new political paradigm. Organizations are comprised of people who, of course, cannot be reduced to a simple spreadsheet model. To effectively reconcile differing social and political perspectives, leaders need to understand the interaction between identity and culture in the workplace, continue to lead with purpose, be inclusive around values and beliefs, and be cognizant of how emotions are influencing decisions and relationships.

Authors

Joy Tan and Tom Handcock of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

Learn more about the authors and the Center for Leadership Insight

Dr. Joe Zammit-Lucia is the founder of RADIX and author of The New Political Capitalism: How Businesses and Societies Can Thrive in a Deeply Politicized World. He is based in London.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices