How CEOs Can Build and Maintain a High-Performing C-suite | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How CEOs Can Build and Maintain a High-Performing C-suite

LeadershipC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam PerformanceBoard Effectiveness

Article

+ 3 authors

December 04, 2023

9 min

LeadershipC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam PerformanceBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Our research shows that five critical factors influence C-suite performance. We explore what they are—and how global C-suites measure up.

Close

Justin Cerilli

Stamford

Dee Fitzgerald

Sydney

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

David Lange

Chicago

Hetty Pye

London

Aimee Williamson

Sydney

As CEO, surrounding yourself with the right executive team is crucial to navigating our increasingly complex business environment. Yet new Russell Reynolds Associates research shows that only two in five leaders feel confident about their C-suite’s ability to drive performance.

So, what’s holding C-suite teams back? And where should CEOs focus their energy to supercharge C-suite performance?

Based on our experience advising thousands of leading organizations globally, we know that the performance and impact of the C-suite comes down to five critical areas. Taken together, each component of C-suite performance has a notable impact on self-reported organizational performance.

RRA’s 5Cs of C-Suite Performance: The what, who, and how

When correlating the 5Cs of C-suite performance to organizational performance (as rated by leaders themselves), we found that each component had a notable impact.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2023, n=2,717, CEOs, board directors, C-level executives, and next generation leaders

To better understand the relationship between organizational performance and these components, we conducted a relative importance regression analysis. Via our H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, which reached more than 2,500 leaders worldwide, we found that:

C-suite performance drivers are interconnected: It’s important to consider all five components when looking to improve organizational performance and create a high-performing C-suite. Commitment, capability, and culture make up almost equal shares of influence on organizational performance, followed closely by composition and continuity.

There’s significant room for improvement across all 5Cs: Less than two in five leaders feel that their C-Suite completely embodies the elements that make up the 5Cs of C-suite performance.

Developing next-generation leadership talent is a must: Leaders need to make the greatest strides in improving continuity & succession within their organizations. Focusing on developing the next generation of C-suite leaders helps secure long-term C-suite performance.

Commitment & Alignment

Commitment & alignment is a critical component of a high-performing C-suite. But our research found that only 39% of leaders feel their C-suite displays a strong commitment to organizational purpose, and only 30% of leaders feel their C-suite demonstrates accountability and ownership of organizational performance (Figure 1).

When these are present, they can be a lever for organizational success. Leaders at high-performing organizations are 4.5 times more likely to feel that their C-suite demonstrates accountability and ownership of organizational performance.

Having CxOs who are committed and aligned enables C-suite teams to achieve both short and long-term goals, creates clarity in decision-making, and reinforces overall focus. Without a strong sense of commitment, the C-suite risks creating siloed teams with little motivation to reach performance goals.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2023, n=2,729, CEOs, board directors, C-level executives, and next generation leaders

Composition & Structure

The C-suite’s composition & structure is vital for ensuring a balanced representation of skills and experience that align with the size and maturity of the organization, accounting for 18% of impact on organizational performance. Even so, only 21% of leaders feel that the composition of their C-suite team aligns with the vision or strategy of the organization, and only 22% of leaders feel that their C-suite represents a breadth of skills, background, and experience (Figure 2).

This isn’t just about the size of your C-suite—it’s also about ensuring a diversity of roles, backgrounds, and thought. Skills like emotional intelligence and self-awareness are vital to fostering differing viewpoints.

CEOs who keep a close eye on their C-suite composition—and are intentional about incorporating diversity of thought—will be best placed to navigate uncertainty ahead. It’s easy to focus too narrowly on a specific role without considering its impact on the broader C-suite, but CEOs need to take a holistic view.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2023, n=2,729, CEOs, board directors, C-level executives, and next generation leaders

Capability & Skill

Capability & skill—which describes leaders who display adaptability in the face of uncertainty and feel equipped to make strategic decisions—accounts for 23% of the influence on C-suite performance, making it the second largest share. Yet only 28% of leaders feel that their C-suite displays adaptability and resilience through uncertainty. Furthermore, only 28% of leaders agree that their C-suite feels comfortable and informed to make strategic decisions (Figure 3).

Of course, each organization’s definition of “the right skills” will differ. Generally, it comes down to ensuring that members’ capabilities and experiences—collectively and individually—align with the organization’s forward-looking strategy.

Above all, the C-suite must feel comfortable making decisions as a team. This ensures sustained progress toward organizational goals, while allowing each executive to engage with one another and the fast-changing environment around them.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2023, n=2,729, CEOs, board directors, C-level executives, and next generation leaders

Culture & Behavior

According to our research, culture accounts for the third largest share of influence on C-suite performance, at 22%. However, only 26% of leaders indicate that their team articulates an inspiring vision that aligns with organizational values, and only 22% of leaders feel that their C-suite displays a high level of trust that is visible across multiple levels of the organization (Figure 4).

High-performing C-suite teams are stewards of organizational culture that enable collaboration, trust, and psychological safety.

A lack of trust can result in a lack of motivation and accountability across the organization. It also leads to more transactional, versus collaborative, operations. A strong appreciation for organizational culture and clear articulation of that culture can lead to more productive employees, improved performance outcomes, and accelerated growth.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2023, n=2,729, CEOs, board directors, C-level executives, and next generation leaders

Continuity & Succession

A deep, resilient, and adaptable pipeline of future leaders enables organizations to evolve their strategy alongside external pressures. While our research shows that continuity and succession account for the lowest share of influence on organizational performance (12%), this is also the area where leaders need the most improvement. Only a dismal 14% of leaders say the following actions “completely describes” their C-suite: regularly reviewing engagement, development, and retention plans. And only 11% of leaders feel that their C-suite team provides appropriate exposure to next generation leaders (Figure 5).

High performing C-suite teams maintain a strong level of engagement with next generation leaders, high exposure to the executive team, and robust succession planning.

When next generation leaders lack exposure and engagement within their organizations, they are more likely to grow dissatisfied and lose motivation.  Organizations can prevent this by focusing on continuity and succession to build next generation leader’s expertise and successfully empower them for future leadership roles.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2023, n=2,729, CEOs, board directors, C-level executives, and next generation leaders

What’s Next?

While long-term organizational goals can stay relatively fixed, the strategy for achieving them rarely survives the realities of today’s operating environment. These critical business issues cannot be solved within an individual function or line of business; instead, they require collaboration across organizational silos and capabilities.

CEOs and boards should think carefully about the health of their executive leadership teams and the succession pipelines that sit below them. While the question “do we have the right leaders on the team to find and capture opportunities in a different environment?” is a hugely important one, CEOs and boards must also look at how those leaders function as a collective unit. To meet the challenges of today and tomorrow, organizations must build a roster of top performers who can quickly come together to address issues and opportunities across a wider range of skills than ever before.

CEOs build successful C-suites when they...

Hire CxOs who are committed and aligned;

Proactively focus on their C-suite composition and take a holistic view of the team;

Ensure that leaders have the right capabilities & skills for the organization;

Enable collaboration, trust and psychological safety that supports organizational culture & behavior;

Continually assess and engage with next generation leaders and develop robust succession plans.

Resulting in:

Higher EQ in leaders;

More nimble responses to uncertainty;

Confidence in strategic decision making;

More productive employees, improved performance outcomes, and accelerated growth;

Increased rate of executive retention and/or internal succession.

Methodology

We asked leaders to rate the overall performance of their organization, as well as the performance of their C-suite across several factors, which make up the 5Cs of C-suite performance. Using these measures, we conducted a relative importance regression analysis to better understand the relationship between organizational performance and these five components. Note that the degree to which one item influences organizational performance is relative to all other items in the model.

Respondents were asked to rate the overall organization's performance on a 5-point scale: Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, Poor

Respondents were also asked to rate their C-suite across a series of 10 attributes on a 4-point scale: Describes completely, describes mostly, describes somewhat, does not describe at all. The 10 attributes were then condensed into 5 components that make up our 5Cs, as outlined below:

Commitment & Alignment

Displays high commitment to organizational purpose

Demonstrates accountability and ownership in organizational performance

Composition & Structure

Composition of the C-suite team aligns with the vision/strategy of the organization as the organization matures

C-suite represents a breadth of skills, background, and experience that contribute to strategic thinking

Capability & Skill

Displays adaptability and resilience through uncertainty

Feels comfortable and informed to make strategic decisions

Culture & Behavior

Articulates an inspiring vision that aligns with the organization's values

Displays a high level of trust that is visible across multiple levels of the organization

Continuity & Succession

Regularly reviews engagement, development, and retention plans

Provides appropriate exposure to emerging or next generation leaders

This analysis is derived from RRA’s Global Leadership Monitor, which is a global survey of boards, CEOs, CxOs, and next-generation leaders that tracks key threats to organizational health and leadership preparedness to face them.

Learn more | Methodology

Authors

Ela Buczynska, Tom Handcock, and Gabrielle Lieberman of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

The authors wish to thank the thousands of leaders from RRA’s global network who responded to the Global Leadership Monitor over the last two years. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2023 and beyond.

Additional contributors

Peter Pickus leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Knowledge Team focused on Executive Assessment and Development.  He is based in Washington, DC.

Elizabeth Burn is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Knowledge Team for Executive Assessment and Development. Elizabeth is based in Washington, DC.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices