What’s Shaping the Future of Retail? Insights from Top Industry CEOs | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What’s Shaping the Future of Retail? Insights from Top Industry CEOs

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationCulture RiskConsumerRetail and Luxury

Article

July 31, 2024

9 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationCulture RiskConsumerRetail and Luxury

Executive Summary

Retail leaders are exploring new talent management strategies, integrating digital transformation and modeling a new retail culture.

Close

Over the past several years, the retail industry has weathered unprecedented challenges, ranging from changing consumer behaviors post-pandemic, continued inflation, increased geopolitical and social uncertainty, limited talent availability, and technology developments. These have all created a challenging environment for leaders across all retail segments—from apparel to grocery and even luxury segments.

In fact, Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor shows that, while consumer leaders are concerned about a range of external threats—with changes in consumer behavior and uncertain economic growth topping the list—they feel less prepared to address nearly every external organizational threat than they did six months ago (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Top external factors vs leadership preparedness for leaders in the consumer industry (H1 2024)

Leaders ranking the top 5 factors that will most impact their organization’s health across the next 12-18 months, and their preparedness to address them

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=794 Consumer leaders | Note: only showing attributes where n>10

To help retail leaders address these challenges, we launched our fifth Annual Consumer CEO Perspectives Review series. For this installation of the report, we recently interviewed 14 CEOs of retail companies (please see appendix for full interviewee list).

Via these conversations, we learned that retail CEOs are aiming to bridge these external threats by 1) getting closer to their consumers and 2) fostering cultures that prioritize innovation, while providing a more purposeful and balanced career trajectory for talent. While these goals are easier said than done, our interviewees are achieving them by taking the following steps:

Embracing the digital transformation—to an extent: Retail CEOs are getting closer to customers through strategic technology investments, such as advanced analytics and AI. These innovations are streamlining operations, enhancing customer experiences, allowing personalized content and providing insights through advanced analytics. However, our interviewees reiterated that they aren’t implementing “tech for tech’s sake”—they aim to tie every new tech investment to a specific business use case.

Focusing on key talent availability: The current talent scarcity in retail requires a renewed focus on employee engagement and development. Additionally, technological innovations are changing the success profile for many roles at every level of the organization. Retail leaders are implementing comprehensive talent management strategies that include competitive compensation and robust training programs, while providing a more purposeful and balanced career trajectory.

Modeling the culture of the future: Retail CEOs are working to foster a culture of resiliency and connectivity across a changing work structure, ensuring that their teams are equipped to handle the now-common rapid changes and uncertainties. Transparent communication and fostering an environment of trust and mutual support will be key for long term success.

Embracing the digital transformation—to an extent

As developments across artificial intelligence, data, and analytics accelerate, technology has emerged as a crucial differentiator for retail organizations. Not only does it enable retailers to better connect with customers via social media, digital commerce has overhauled consumer behaviors and expectations. Additionally, recent data and AI advancements are helping retailers become more efficient, optimizing supply chain processes and providing faster customer care. As consumers take a more global view, retail’s competitive environment is becoming more entangled. To keep pace, our interviewees all agreed that retail organizations need to amplify their innovative and technological capabilities.

"Great businesses interrupt themselves--if you want to build a business that's going to last 100 years, then you better change too. Consumers will drive that change if you don't."

CEO of beauty / personal care retailer

That said, retail CEOs remain unsure of the best way to approach implementing these new technologies—particularly AI. Our data reinforces this point—according to our Monitor, while 77% of retail leaders agree that a strong understanding of generative AI will be a required skill for future C-suite members, only 40% are confident that they have the right skills to implement AI in their organization today. And while boards are now requesting quarterly updates on AI and other data-related endeavours, only 22% of retail leaders believe they have the right expertise of the board to advise on generative AI implementations.

In response, our interviewees emphasized the need for strong partnership with their boards to develop data and analytics capabilities and capture innovation opportunities. While there’s still many unknowns around these innovations, boards remain committed to challenging CEOs to think big. As such, our interviewees are boosting their data capabilities, gathering customer data from a range of new sources, and ensuring that their dedicated data and analytics teams are empowered to inform strategy and informed data-backed decision-making. These CEOs are recognizing customer data’s transformative effect on operations, which is prompting discussions on data acquisition strategies, investments, and the delineation of responsibilities between the CIO and other departments.

To be successful in any organization, technology innovations to be both top down and bottom up. Particularly in retail, both customer-facing frontline employees and the leadership team will benefit from technology educating and upskilling. Retail CEOs are working to ensure that the C-suite understands what technology’s implications—both positive and negative—so as to generate a culture of agility across the organization.

Focusing on key talent availability

Talent availability has remained an issue for the retail industry post-pandemic. The retail talent pool has continued to shrink, with turnover rates soaring as individuals opt for new opportunities in the gig economy and find freelancing jobs with more flexibility.

The need for in-person presence in retail field roles poses an additional challenge, as the industry grapples with the loss of experienced merchants who once thrived in department store programs. While advancements in analytics and technology offer valuable insights, there is a recognition that they cannot fully replace the intuition and expertise of seasoned retail professionals or in-store human oversight.

To address this, our interviewees noted a few different solutions to reinvigorate their talent pipelines. Some are offering better compensation or more benefits. Others are trialing more flexible work arrangements when possible. Many are also establishing internal programs to develop frontline talent faster, encouraging training and capability developments—sometimes even in tandem with other retail organizations. While approaches vary, it’s clear that every retail CEO is grappling with new talent strategies in the current work environment.

From a skills perspective, retail leaders are focusing on sales skills, as they are inherent to enticing an inflation-weary consumer base. They are also prioritizing deeper analytical and data acumen, due to the tech changes noted in the section prior. Additionally, much like their CPG counterparts, they are prioritizing leaders who bring curiosity, agility, and empathy, as these skills are required to navigate the complexities of the modern business landscape.

Modeling a culture for the future of retail

To best leverage these digital transformations and attract and retain top talent, retailers need to create a work environment in which their people can innovate and flourish. Much of this comes down to a healthy organizational culture. However, many interviewees noted that a cultural divide is emerging between their frontline employees (who have to be in stores when on the clock) and those at headquarters (who have more flexibility when it comes to their work arrangement.) This is leaving many CEOs wondering how to foster creativity and collaboration across this dichotomy.

"Merchants may spend three days in the office focusing on vendor meetings and seasonal strategies, while utilizing remote work for tasks like data analysis and business understanding. Implementing initiatives like a designated "connect" week, where teams gather in the office once a month, helps reinforce the value of in-person interactions while allowing flexibility for remote work during the rest of the month."

CEO of specialty retailer

While some retail CEOs are calling their entire workforce back to the office, it’s well-established that workers at every level appreciate flexibility, and that offering flexible work arrangements can be a key differentiator when retaining top talent.

As such, the CEOs whose organizations adopt a flexible arrangement are spending three to four days a week in the office, as they see this as essential for driving innovation.  To motivate in-office time, leaders need to frame their organization’s culture as an asset that people have access to if they’re spending more time together. Perhaps even more important than number of days spent in office, leaders with flexible arrangements must recognize that remote work has thinned people’s ability to develop intimate emotional connections with their colleagues. With that in mind, leaders should challenge themselves to design spaces and construct group meetings/events that preserve human connections and collaboration over the weeks when their people don’t run into each other in the hallway. What emotional experiences that employees have when they’re together can also be recreated in a flexible or hybrid work setting?

While there is no singular solution to retail’s working structure, leaders who commit to being meaningfully present when they ask people to come into the office to collaborate—and equally conscientious of the fact that privilege of flexible work is not available to everyone in the industry—will be best equipped to bridge the gap between these two segments of the retail workforce. This can be accomplished via transparent communication regarding challenges and strategic decisions, fostering an environment of trust and mutual support. By addressing these issues head-on and demonstrating strong, adaptive leadership, retail executives can guide their organizations through these turbulent times and position them for long-term success.

What’s next for retail CEOs?

As the retail industry continues to change and evolve, retail leaders should consider the following:

Align technology investments with your organization’s overall strategy: As media platforms change consumers’ behaviors and expectations, retail needs to keep pace with innovation. Ensure that tech investments and implementations are in line with your organization’s growth and talent strategies, and that you’re able to invest in associated up/reskilling as needed. The rise of AI isn’t just about implementing a new tool—we are in the realm of full business model transformation. As such, it’s key to have a clear-eyed view on which capabilities your organization has in-house, where any gaps may occur, and how your talent strategy needs to adapt to your future-state goals.

Develop comprehensive talent management strategies: According to our Monitor, 60% of retail leaders are willing to make a move beyond their industry.  With that in mind, retail organizations need to work to retain top talent, using motivators like competitive compensation, flexible working conditions, and robust training programs. Investing in leaders’ development plans via targeted accelerators, mentorship and sponsorship programs, and targeted accelerators will help retain top performers.

Frame your organization’s culture as an asset that people have access to if they’re spending more time together: Leaders who double down on facilitating connection will have better luck in bringing their teams together—and maintaining the same level of collaboration when those teams are apart. Design spaces and construct group meetings/events that preserve human connection, and encourage senior leaders to commit to a consistent, engaged presence for employees across every work arrangement.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we can help your organization to succeed by:

Identifying and investing in the right leaders for your board or C-suite, using our decades of executive search experience

Carefully examining the capabilities of your existing board or C-suite and benchmarking them against the current market

Carrying out executive assessments, which evaluate your executive team’s leadership approaches and their likely impacts, strengths, and areas for improvement

Conducting psychometric testing to better understand your leadership team’s instincts, traits, and any potential behavioral derailers

Helping you develop a deeper understanding of your C-suite capabilities, uncovering and addressing potential gaps with our C-suite success experts

Authors

Claus Fischer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Retail and Luxury practice. He is based in Hamburg.
David Torres leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Knowledge team. He is based in London.

Appendix

A.T.U.

Sascha Bopp

CEO

Bulgari (LVMH )

Jean-Christophe BABIN

CEO

C&A

Giny Boer

CEO

Chrono24

Carsten Keller

CEO

Five Below

Joel Anderson

CEO

LVMH Group Japan

Norbert LEURET

Regional CEO

Mammut

Heiko Schäfer

CEO

MGP Cosmetics

Hongquan Song

CEO

Olaplex

Amanda Baldwin

CEO

Petsmart

J.K. Symancyk

CEO

Sainsbury

Simon Roberts

CEO

Snipes

Dennis Schröder

CEO

Swarovski

Alexis Nasard

CEO

Tod's

Simona Cattaneo

CEO

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices