The New Enterprise Customer Activation & Growth Leader | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The New Enterprise Customer Activation & Growth Leader

Leadership StrategiesCustomer Activation and GrowthGrowth and ScalingCustomer Activation and Growth

Article

Norm Yustin

May 20, 2024

7 min

Leadership StrategiesCustomer Activation and GrowthGrowth and ScalingCustomer Activation and Growth

Executive Summary

A new generation Customer Activation & Growth leaders are focusing on enterprise growth via a consumer-centric, tech-enabled agenda.

Close

Norm Yustin

Chicago

As technology innovation and adoption continues to increase at unprecedented rates, companies are finally embracing the evolution of go-to-market leaders into customer activation and growth leaders—realizing they need to seamlessly bring marketing and technology closer together.

Customer Activation and Growth (CAG) leaders continue to lead all go-to-market initiatives across the enterprise, but now operate alongside, or in some cases integrated into, the technology function. CAG leaders can be called chief customer officers, commercial officers, digital officers, revenue officers, customer experience officers, sales officers, product officers, growth officers, and, yes, marketing officers—regardless of title, their main remit is to activate the customer and grow the business, and it’s usually done in close alignment with technology. And this wide-ranging role is gaining ground—in 2023, we tracked 17% more global CAG appointments than in 2022.

Traditionally seen as marketing leaders, brand creatives, or communication strategists, customer activation and growth leaders have evolved into vital drivers of monetization, innovation, customer experience, AI transformation, and data-driven decision-making. This stems from the rise of digital marketing, social media, and advanced analytics like AI and ML, which have fundamentally altered the way companies interact with customers.

Starting in 2020, Russell Reynolds Associates began tracking global customer activation and growth leader hires across all industries to provide a greater understanding of CAG leadership trends within the context of rapid digitalization, changing consumer behaviors, and heightened emphasis on data-driven strategies.

This report shares findings gleaned from the 13,000+ publicly disclosed CAG leadership appointments tracked during this timeframe. These learnings include:

The CMO role isn’t going away—it’s consciously uncoupling

The gender parity chief marketing officers have achieved doesn’t represent all customer activation and growth leaders

Internal promotions are growing, but external hiring still dominates

Companies are favoring industry expertise over outside perspective

The CMO role isn’t going away—it’s consciously uncoupling

The chief marketing officer (CMO) role has evolved dramatically from focusing on brand stewardship to driving customer activation, innovation, and growth. This shift was propelled by the digital revolution, which demands a blend of technical savvy and creative insight to harness data, digital marketing, and AI for deeper customer engagement.

These shifts have been all over the (marketing) news; numerous headlines ask if the CMO role is disappearing. The answer? It’s complicated.

Year over year chief marketing officer appointments have remained steady since 2021, with a slight dip in 2023 (Figure 1).

Figure 1: YoY Customer activation and growth role appointments (2020-2023)

Source: RRA proprietary "CAG Moves Analysis," 2020-2023, n=13,638

Rather than eliminating the CMO role, more companies are taking a “conscious uncoupling” approach. While there is still a need for traditional marketing leaders, organizations are increasingly emphasizing roles that are directly connected to revenue generation, product development, and commercial strategy, reflecting organizations’ evolving priorities. The slow in traditional CMO appointments signals a strategic pivot towards roles that encapsulate the modern demands of driving customer engagement and business growth in a digital age. Companies are increasingly appointing roles like chief commercial officer (who have experienced a 78% increase in hiring between 2020 and 2023), chief revenue officer (73%), and chief digital officer (73%), reflecting a broader growth mandate (Figure 2). These titles, while varying, underscore a unified objective: leveraging digital insights and customer-centric strategies to fuel business expansion.

The leaders who currently hold or once held CMO roles aren’t out of a job. They just might have a new job title in near future, that is, if they expand their toolkit beyond the traditional marketing skills.

Figure 2: Growth rate of top Customer activation & growth appointments (2020-2023)

Source: RRA proprietary "CAG Moves Analysis," 2020-2023, n=13,638

The unfortunate misconception around CAG leadership gender parity

Gender parity in the C-Suite continues to be a challenge across the globe. Within that context, CAG leaders face a unique layer. Similar to other C-suite roles, appointments for men CAG leaders far outpace total women appointments (Figure 3). Our data indicates a very gradual shift towards more gender-balanced leadership teams, with a slight increase in women appointments over the years, although the pace of change appears slow with a slight dip from 2022 (32%) to 2023 (31%). This aligns with current trends of women in leadership roles growing, albeit very slowly.

Figure 3: YoY men vs women CAG appointments (2020-2023)

Source: RRA proprietary "CAG Moves Analysis," 2020-2023, n=13,638

Because the chief marketing officer role is closest to gender parity—with women holding 48% of CMO roles globally, and men holding 52%--and because the CMO role is typically representative of the broader CAG function, there is common misconception that CAG leaders are closer to overall gender parity than other C-suite roles (Figure 4). Unfortunately, this is not true.

Between 2020 and 2023, the only CAG role where women outnumbered men was the chief communications officer (comprised of 65% women vs. 35% men). Chief brand officers are equally balanced (49% women vs. 51% men); as well as aforementioned chief marketing officers.

However, men dominate chief revenue (89%), chief sales (88%), chief product (81%), chief commercial (79%) and chief digital (78%) officer roles.

Overall, there is still a large disparity between the genders in CAG leadership roles, with women being underrepresented, especially in revenue and sales-oriented positions. Yes, there have been steps in the right direction over recent years, but CAG leaders are far from parity.

Figure 4: CAG role appointments by gender (2020-2023)

Source: RRA proprietary "CAG Moves Analysis," 2020-2023, n=13,638

Internal promotions are growing, but external hires still dominate

Since 2020, there has been a 30% increase in the number of internal appointments for customer activation and growth leaders. This increase can most likely be attributed to the current economic environment, in which marketing budgets have been reduced and companies are looking to upskill their current teams. Don’t be fooled though—despite this increase, external appointments still far outweighed internal appointments (77% vs 33%) over the past four years. Put another way: if you’re second in line for the chief marketing officer position, you have a one in four chance of getting that role.

Unsurprisingly, chief customer officers are most often internally appointed, as these leaders need a deep knowledge of engaging and maintaining the company’s current consumer, along with acquiring new ones. Who better than someone who’s already embedded in the business, familiar with the customer and the strategic direction of the company? Conversely, we see 82% of chief revenue officers coming from outside the organization. This is because chief revenue officers are brought in to help companies achieve growth, market impact, efficiency and speed of execution; to achieve these new ways of thinking, organizations typically look externally (Figure 5).

Not far behind CROs were chief digital officers, with 79% externally appointed. Given the recent proliferation of generative AI and renewed focus on digital transformation, companies are looking for leaders with experience driving change and innovation to achieve their digital objectives.

Figure 5: External vs. internal CAG appointments (2020-2023)

Source: RRA proprietary "CAG Moves Analysis," 2020-2023, n=13,638

While organizations tend to look within industry for their CAG leaders, some sectors are branching out

Over the past few years, most customer activation and growth appointments came from within their current industry (Figure 6). The logic is similar to hiring a customer officer from an internal pool of candidates; companies are most comfortable hiring a leader who already understands their latest business trends and current market challenges, yet can also bring a fresh perspective with a competitive advantage. This has been especially important, given the current economic and digital challenges companies are facing.

Figure 6: CAG appointments by industry, same vs. different (2020-2023)

Source: RRA proprietary "CAG Moves Analysis," 2020-2023, n=13,638

Traditional sectors such as financial services, industrial, and healthcare are deeply rooted in industry expertise, which makes cross-pollination more difficult (Figure 7). For example, in the healthcare space, external hires from a different industry declined from 38% to 30%. Service firms also hired far less from another industry, decreasing from 54% of hires to just 12%. Financial services also hired far less from outside its sector, with external-to-financial services hires declining from 40% in 2022 to just 24% in 2023.

However, our data shows one historically traditional sector changing its external hiring approach: Industrial and Natural Resources. Since 2021, the industrial sector actually began seeking external expertise, increasing these hires from 29% to 37%.  This variation reflects the specific challenges and opportunities faced by each sector, including the pace of digital transformation and the need for innovative strategies to navigate post-pandemic market dynamics.

Figure 7: External CAG appointments from a different industry (2021-2023)

Source: RRA proprietary "CAG Moves Analysis," 2021-2023, n=12,296

What’s next for CAG leaders?

The evolving customer activation and growth leadership landscape underscores the need for roles that align with the current realities of digital transformation, consumer-centric strategies, and the importance of inclusivity. As these roles pivot to accommodate digital imperatives, CAG leaders are presented with opportunities to expand their influence, becoming strategic partners and thought leaders.

The future of customer activation and growth leadership is not in preserving titles. Rather, it hinges on embracing these broadened roles, enabling leaders to drive organizational impact through deepened customer-centric strategies and digital transformation efforts to achieve enterprise growth.

Authors

Norm Yustin leads the Russell Reynolds Associates' Customer Activation & Growth practice. He is based in Chicago.

Antoinetta Canada leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Customer Activation & Growth Knowledge team. She is based in Chicago.

The New Enterprise Customer Activation & Growth Leader

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices