The Evolving Landscape of AI and its Profound Impact on Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Evolving Landscape of AI and its Profound Impact on Leadership

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

Constantine Alexandrakis

November 10, 2023

3 min

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive summary

Leaders quick to maximize AI's potential gain advantage. AI is a business issue and leadership imperative.

Close

Constantine Alexandrakis

Chicago

The rapid and meteoric rise of artificial intelligence is understandably generating both optimism and fear in the business world.

But this much is clear: leaders who are quick to maximize AI’s vast potential will gain a huge advantage over those who aren't.

Russell Reynolds Associates (RRA) has always been a tech-forward consultancy. Data and analytics are an essential part of how we operate as a firm and how we discover future-ready leaders for our clients.

For years, technology companies have turned to us when they need senior leaders with significant AI expertise.

What we’re seeing now is companies outside the tech world—in financial services, consumer sectors, manufacturing industries, professional services, and more—also rushing to find AI-savvy leaders.

AI is no longer a tech issue. It is a business issue and a leadership imperative that is drawing interest from virtually every industry sector across the world.

I had the pleasure of exploring what the arrival of AI means for business and leadership with two prominent experts during a recent RRA webinar, “The Rise of AI—Implications for Leadership.”

My colleague and RRA’s global AI practice co-leader Fawad Bajwa was clear from the outset that AI’s disruptive impact differs from previous technology revolutions because of the outsized benefits it delivers.

When applied appropriately, AI can solve complex challenges, anticipate problems, and identify valuable trends and commercial opportunities far faster (and often more effectively) than any human brain.

Unlocking this potential will require a complete rethink of traditional leadership skills—and what it takes to lead.

As Dr. Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic, a psychologist, author, entrepreneur, and widely recognized expert on AI and leadership, said during our session, “Expertise is not what it used to be.”

“It’s now less about knowing the answers to a lot of questions, and more about asking the right questions and knowing what to do with the insights you get from AI and actually making smart decisions.”

As AI evolves, bold leadership will only become more important. It might seem counterintuitive, but adopting a human-centered approach to leadership is one of the absolute must-haves in an AI world.

Dr. Chamorro-Premuzic made a compelling case during our discussion that as AI decreases the value of stored human knowledge and expertise, it increases “the importance of soft skills—things like emotional intelligence, and the ability to create psychological safety to connect with others on a human level.”
At RRA, we have long believed that leadership is not defined solely by a leader’s IQ.

Effective leaders also need a desire to learn and listen from others, and the emotional intelligence to manage and motivate others. They are able to maintain employee morale and nurture an ethical, mission-driven, motivating culture, even throughout the most disruptive changes.

The shift toward emotional intelligence was already well underway. When we worked with the Harvard Business School and Imperial College London to analyze 5,000 job descriptions for C-suite roles over the last 20 years, we found that mentions of strong social skills increased by almost 30%. (Incidentally, we harnessed machine learning tools for this research.)

For all the inherent challenges that AI will undoubtedly bring, we are fortunate to be living and working at the dawn of this revolution.
Yes, AI will narrow the expertise gap by expanding access to insights and knowledge. But established leaders will still maintain their advantage if they proactively adopt AI to augment their experience, while also doubling down on honing their soft skills. Accepting this reality, rather than fearing it, will be the key to unlocking the vast potential of AI.

For leaders today, there are only two options: embrace AI or fall behind. In any case, there is no turning back.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices