3 Characteristics of Successful PortCo Management Teams | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

3 Characteristics of Successful PortCo Management Teams

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

November 16, 2023

3 min

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

Confidence in tech portfolio company management teams has declined, impacting success. Successful teams have the right capabilities.

Close

Over the past 2 years, our research has indicated a consistent downward trend in the level of confidence that technology portfolio company C-suite leaders have regarding their management teams.

The CEOs of private capital backed tech companies have demonstrated exceptional resilience under the pressure of intense competition and a challenging market. They've learned how to weather market fluctuations, adapt quickly, and make agile decisions that keep their businesses thriving. But, under the pressure of a deeply challenging market and rapidly evolving expectations of success, management team dynamics have deteriorated.

Tech portfolio companies with executive teams that lack confidence in each other and their operation as a team are very likely to fall short of meeting their targets.

Research shows time and time again that the quality of a portfolio company’s management team is the most-cited reason for deal success and the second most cited reason for deal failure (Bain&Co, 2021).

Over the past 2 years, among PortCo Tech Executives:

Confidence in leadership capabilities has declined by 31 percentage points.

Confidence in executives' ability to embrace change has declined by 16 points.

Confidence in effective collaboration as a team has declined by 9 points.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor 2022 & 2023

Today’s interwoven web of challenges require the collaborative strength of the leadership team to solve.

It’s no surprise as the demands upon tech CEOs, even remarkable ones, are more than a single leader can solve. Each challenge further complicated by the unique stakeholder dynamics of being a private capital backed business.

Tech CEOs that say they are prepared to address the challenges of 2024 share a common trait: A formidable management team who are individually deeply experienced in their domain and well-functioning as a collective.

3 characteristics of successful tech portfolio company management teams:

All leaders have the right capabilities for the needs. Conducting executive evaluations, which blend industry, function, personality, and performance data, enable firms to predict how successful a leader will be in current and future business contexts, so you can make the right succession decisions.

Work together effectively as a team. During times of transition, such as a merger or private equity deal, the need for strong teams at the top becomes abundantly clear as a make or break factor. CEOs must investigate existing group dynamics and capabilities, align teams around key objectives, and ultimately field a top team that’s ready to meet strategic priorities during “make or break” moments.

Able to effectively embrace change. Executive leadership assessments aren’t still portraits, they’re dynamic snapshots that capture the ability of leaders to change over time as market conditions and dynamics change, enabling CEOs to make informed decisions for what’s ahead.

There’s more. We’ll continue to track this topic and share updates on our research - going deeper into the profiles of the leaders that make up a winning team and sharing the stories of how successful portfolio company CEOs have instilled and maintained confidence among their management teams. Stay tuned!

We welcome the chance to tell you more: Reach out to set up a chat

Recent Tech News from RRA

We are pleased to announce that we have acquired Savage Partners, an executive search firm serving growth equity-backed software companies and world-class technology executives.

Bringing Savage Partners on board will further deepen and enhance Russell Reynolds Associates’ core leadership advisory work and capabilities in growth-oriented technology companies. We look forward to combining our strengths and assets to provide industry-leading leadership and succession planning guidance to the tech industry.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices