Chapter 3: Distorting leadership evaluations when assessing candidates | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Chapter 3: Distorting leadership evaluations when assessing candidates

As candidates are presented, there is no shortage of distractions for key decision-makers while they evaluate candidates and deliberate on trade-offs.

Much of CEO succession and executive search literature has referenced mismanaging biases (in particular, our own experts noted affinity bias, a tendency to prefer people that look and think like us; confirmation bias, a tendency to notice, focus on, and give greater credence to evidence that fits with our existing beliefs; and halo bias, a bias whereby positive impressions of people in one area positively influences our feelings in another area).

Our research also revealed two traps that may be less obvious: the fallacy of comparison and fundamental attribution error.

Trap 1: Succumbing to the fallacy of comparison

Experiencing the fallacy of comparison is natural; there is an intrinsic inclination to directly compare candidates against each other to make a quicker decision, to hone in on a capability, or to simply evaluate two tangible options (rather than comparing to an intangible, unseen ideal profile). But in doing so, decision-makers may inadvertently overvalue or undervalue certain characteristics.

This tendency can be due in part to distinction bias in joint evaluation: when two options are directly contrasted against each other, the differences seem substantial. However, when evaluating the two options separately, the differences appear less significant, or there is a realization that the gap between expectation and reality is not as wide as previously thought.

In joint evaluation, decision-makers are more likely to hone in on insignificant details or elevate minor differences as the determining factors in the decision-making process. For example, boards may find themselves drawn to a leader with a distinguished educational background who is well-connected with prominent figures, as opposed to a candidate who has not yet built a deep network. Having established relationships can certainly enhance organizational growth and opportunities; but, it may not have been an original criterion, and it may not be a gap that the organization is currently facing.

In another situation, boards may find themselves comparing two models: a tenured candidate with CEO experience who has led through turbulent markets, versus an emerging leader who is being shaped by experimental ideas. In evaluating them against each other, it may seem more reasonable to appoint a seasoned leader who offers conventional wisdom and confidence. However, in stepping back and separately evaluating each candidate against the success profile, boards may realize that the emerging leader better addresses the current leadership gap, bringing intellectual diversity from non-traditional institutions.

Stakeholders may also unconsciously employ the ‘take-the-best’ heuristic, comparing only one competency, instead of evaluating holistically across all success profile competencies. For example, a board may be swayed by a candidate for their unparalleled charismatic storytelling capabilities—critical in today’s landscape for connecting with employees, reassuring investors, or shaping public sentiment—and believe that the silver medalist falls significantly short in this competency. But in separately evaluating each individual against the success profile, the board may find that this candidate only spikes in storytelling, whereas the silver medalist not only brings good-enough storytelling capabilities, but also outperforms across all success profile attributes.

Trap 2: Succumbing to fundamental attribution error

The idea of transferable capabilities—skills and abilities that are useful and applicable in any organization or role—should be met with pause at the senior leadership level. The concept traditionally views leadership capabilities independent of context, does not account for leadership potential, and focuses on table-stakes competencies. Holding onto the idea of transferability will create mismatched expectations between what the board anticipates and what the potential CEO can accomplish.

In naturally giving the candidate the benefit of the doubt, boards may assume that the candidate was responsible for many of the successes at their previous organization, and extrapolate which capabilities were important for success. However, it is not always evident what factors contributed to a leader’s success.

Soft leadership capabilities—such as strategic thinking, purpose, agility, and emotional intelligence—are difficult to measure, and may only come to life when individuals are evaluated beyond traditional business experiences. Here, stakeholders encounter fundamental attribution error: the belief that personality traits and individual capabilities have more impact on outcomes than external environmental factors.

Candidate experience, when taken at face value, does not always tell the full story. Many leadership accomplishments occur in part due to hidden (perhaps immeasurable) attributes—how these were bolstered by an effective team, the available resources and information at hand, or serendipitous market events. These external elements make it difficult to understand what achievements can be directly attributed to candidates’ leadership and how transferable their perceived successes will be in a new environment.

With increasing volatility and uncertainty coming from all sides, boards cannot afford to merely assume that a leader’s prior successes are automatically transferable to another organization, without properly considering contextual factors.

How can boards overcome these CEO succession decision-making complexities?

Redirect discussion to consistently evaluate candidates against the success profile.
The independent board leader will be seen as having the strongest influence; they should be prepared to redirect conversations with an authentic tone that invites stewardship and trust. As the process funnels down to the finalists, the independent board leader must ensure that stakeholders are identifying specific, success profile-informed evidence that supports why a candidate should be appointed CEO. Bringing the discussion back to the initial macro-level framework and centering the evaluation around the success profile will prevent decision-makers from giving too much weight to minor differences that ultimately won’t impact the organization’s leadership needs.

Utilize the right evaluations, techniques, and tools to gather information that truly adds to what can be gleaned from work history and interviews.
Once boards identify what remaining evidence they need to make a decision, ensure the appropriate tools and methodologies are used for evaluation. Decision-makers should focus on probing beyond traditional experiences, gaining insight into how candidates manage extraordinary situations, and determining how they will enhance and complement the leadership team.

« Previous Chapter

Next Chapter »

Explore more chapters

Chapter 1: Underestimating strategic alignment efforts when defining success factors

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting strategic alignment and how to overcome them

Chapter 2: Forgetting to create sufficient optionality when determining the talent universe

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting optionality and how to overcome them

Chapter 4: Failing to consider the ripple effects of the CEO selection decision

Learn more about the psychological traps when boards fail to appreciate CEO succession consequences and how to overcome them

Methodology

Data sourced from Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, which surveyed 500 CEOs, board directors, and CHROs on the state of CEO succession and stakeholder perspectives, and interviews with 14 of our Board and CEO Advisory Partners consultants.

Authors

Joy Tan and Tom Handcock of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

Learn more about the authors and The Center for Leadership Insight

Justus O’Brien is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in New York.
Dean Stamoulis is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in Atlanta.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank contributors from Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners who participated for their time and their valuable perspective:

Gretchen Anderson

Sarah Eames

Dee Fitzgerald

David Lange

Stephen Langton

Margot McShane

Luke Meynell

Rusty O’Kelley

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Jennifer Rockwood

Charles Tribbett III

Ty Wiggins

Anita Wingrove

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Start your CEO Succession story

Speak to a Consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices