The New Philanthropists: Evolution of Community Foundations |

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The New Philanthropists: Evolution of Community Foundations

SuccessionSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersCEO Succession

Article

Tory Clark

January 12, 2024

4 min

SuccessionSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersCEO Succession

Executive Summary

We share unique insight into the evolution of community foundations in this third installment of our New Philanthropists series.

Close

Tory Clark

Atlanta
Washington DC

For more than a century, community foundations (“CFs”) have been dedicated to addressing local community needs and supporting local nonprofits.

Russell Reynolds Associates’ experience working with some of the world’s leading philanthropic and social impact organizations has given us unique insight into the evolution of community foundations (“CFs”) and their leadership needs. In this third installment of our New Philanthropists series, we share emerging trends in the CF space, and what they mean for leadership and succession.

Modelling place-based impact trusted by many, the field has grown to encompass about 700 CFs across the United States, with assets under management ranging from a few million dollars to more than ten billion dollars.

With CFs now a giant component of the philanthropic industry, their traditional models have undergone significant disruption in recent years. More specifically, we have observed the following shifts in the community foundation formula:

Disrupted business models

The community foundation business model is undergoing increased disruption resulting from, among other developments, the explosive growth of competitive donor advised funds being offered by for-profit banks and fintech start-ups, the increase in bespoke affinity groups pooling funds, and new wealth opting to establish foundations.

Shifting landscape

The donor landscape is shifting across the country with a new and increasingly diverse generation participating in philanthropy. This evolution coupled with a disrupted business model is prompting community foundations to differentiate their offerings and approach to delivering and influencing place-based impact.

“Customer” identification

With increasing frequency, community foundations are being challenged to define their ultimate “customer,” whether the donors themselves or the communities and beneficiaries they seek to support.

“Ecosystem coordinators”

Community foundations are more frequently being called upon to serve in the role of “ecosystem coordinators,” working to strategically bring together private, public, and non-profit actors to drive impact.

Community representation and inclusion

Community foundations are under increasing pressure to ensure that their leadership is reflective of the communities they serve and that their grantmaking processes are participatory and inclusive.

Accountability and measurement

As community foundation AUMs grow, so does their visibility and scrutiny. Communities are increasingly asking their CF to provide metrics on the impact of their structure and investments. Many CFs are moving away from a strictly AUM model (assets under management) to an AUI model (assets under influence), thus shifting their traditional operating model from one that takes direction solely from donors to institutions seeking explicitly to influence donor-directed giving.  With this shift, some CFs are also trying to increase their board-directed giving and lean into their community leadership role as “ecosystem coordinators.”

New giving structures

Many quicker and more streamlined cash grant-making processes that were introduced across the COVID pandemic, are now being retained and used more frequently than ever before.

The community foundation’s evolution and its impact on leadership

Alongside these trends, significant leadership transitions are afoot within the country’s largest CFs. Many long-term and iconic leaders responsible for stewarding their organization’s growth have recently retired or will soon be stepping down, making way for a new generation of CF leadership. CF boards nationwide are carefully considering the skills and competencies required of the CEOs who will be required to navigate toward increased social impact during a period of disruption.

From our work advising leading CFs on their most pressing strategic leadership challenges, we have identified that successful community foundation CEOs need to be:

Connective conveners, brand builders, & influencers

Enthusiastically and authentically building strong relationships within the region, demonstrating strong emotional intelligence and an ability to communicate clearly and persuasively.

Possessing an ability to retain donors, persuade and cultivate next-generation and new donor networks, and manage conflicting donor interests through a collaborative relationship with the board.

Effectively representing their foundation in the regional communities it serves and on the national stage.

Transformational leaders and managers

Setting priorities decisively, delegating responsibilities, assuring accountability, and allocating resources appropriately to ensure sustainable results through excellent execution.

Managing the structure and processes of the foundation, with the business acumen required by new financial models.

Preparing the foundation for leadership succession.

Savvy fundraisers & business developers

Understanding a wide and ever-changing array of financial products and donation vehicles, as well as the donor-specific value proposition for each.

A creative and strategic decision-maker

Willing to take risks and test new technologies and structures, while balancing thoughtful considerations of their implications.

Demonstrating an entrepreneurial and creative approach to developing new, innovative ideas that will best position the foundation in its service to the community.

Seeking and analyzing data from a variety of sources to support decisions and align others with the organization's overall strategy.

A passionate leader committed to shared values, including

A deep and abiding passion and connection for the region and the work.

Demonstrated personal and professional commitment to diversity, equity, and inclusion, and track record of translating an organization's diversity and inclusion values and commitments into specific strategies and actions.

Dedication to building an internal culture of trust, respect and strong internal communications.

Cultural acuity, emotional intelligence, empathy, and integrity.

What’s next for community foundations and their leaders?

This is both a dynamic and exciting time for community foundations. As the industry continues to evolve, CFs need CEOs who enthusiastically lean into innovation, listen and partner closely with communities, seek to redefine place-based philanthropy, and ultimately transform the industry to drive deeper, more equitable, and sustainable social impact within communities.

Philanthropic Leadership in a Changing World

It is clear—the world is changing. What is less clear is how the philanthropic world will change alongside it.

More information

Authors

Tory Clark co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Development, Advocacy and Philanthropy practice. She is based in Atlanta.

Vanessa Di Matteo is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education Knowledge team. She is based in London.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices