Strategies for Managing Conflict and Disagreement in the Boardroom | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Strategies for Managing Conflict and Disagreement in the Boardroom

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Article

September 17, 2024

3 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

We've provided four strategies for board chairs to effectively handle challenging discussions and foster constructive dialogue and agreement.

Close

Dr. Richard Davis

Toronto

Theodore L. Dysart

Chicago

David Lange

Chicago

Reprinted with permission from the National Association of Corporate Directors after originally appearing as a Directorship online article on September 17, 2024.

Boards operate in a complex and dynamic world where they face various challenges and opportunities that require strategic decision-making and effective communication. Directors will inevitably encounter challenging discussions with their fellow directors, CEOs, or various stakeholders across a range of delicate subjects, such as performance, succession planning, ethics, and governance. When discussing these subjects, disagreements and conflict are bound to arise. How can board chairs adeptly navigate these situations to promote constructive dialogue and consensus among everyone involved?

Establish Policies, Systems, and Processes

It is critical that boards have a mechanism in place to surface any issues or questions before they escalate into conflicts. Board chairs should consider utilizing skill-set matrices to align the board composition with the business focus and hold independent director-only meetings to discuss any concerns or feedback. The best boards are proactive in seeking feedback from their members in the context of the skills and responsibilities that each director brings to the table.

In one recent example, a board member approaching a board’s mandatory term limit thought that fellow directors would make an exception. By having good governance practices established and refusing to offer exceptions along the way, this board chair was able to navigate the difficult conversation with greater ease than had those systems not been in place.

Board chairs can also leverage executive sessions or forums where board members can come together and share their views, even if they disagree. By having these practices in place, board chairs can ensure that there are no surprises or shocks in board meetings and that everyone is on the same page about the agenda and the objectives. In the same way that the best CEOs create forums to talk about the “how” of the team—not just the “what” — the best board chairs also focus on the types of behaviors that are expected of the directors.

Prepare for the Conversation Before It Occurs

When it comes to delivering a difficult message, such as asking an underperforming director to step down or informing a CEO of a negative evaluation, the role of the board chair or lead director is crucial. It is critical that the chair be thoughtful about the optimal time and place to have difficult conversations, so as not to alienate recipients or observers—or create factions. Most often, difficult messages will land best in private conversations, out of earshot of other directors. Additionally, it is vital for the board chair to fully understand each board member, their motivations, and their styles, and use those insights to tailor communications accordingly.

The chair should communicate messages in a direct and respectful way without making any exceptions or compromises, explain the rationale and evidence behind a decision, avoid any personal attacks or emotional reactions, and be prepared to deal with any resistance or backlash while remaining firm and consistent.

Draw Out Diverse and Dissenting Views

Differences in opinion should be encouraged and can be quite advantageous, provided they are shared positively and constructively. A great board chair honors good board composition and forms of team of rivals.

Board chairs should also identify members who can deflate conflict in the meeting and help pull the board out of circular discussion when a decision needs to be made, preparing them in advance for the responsibility. Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board Culture and Directors Behavior Study found that “gold medal board members” are more likely to communicate and engage with others in a constructive manner, go out of their way to understand differences and perspectives, and ask the right questions to keep the discussion focused on what matters most.

Board members should not be afraid to openly argue or debate in the boardroom, especially on big strategic decisions, such as whether to sell or keep a business. Nonetheless, board members should avoid backchanneling or undermining the board's decision once it has been made. Instead, they should actively and visibly support any decisions once finalized.

Tackle the Underlying Issue

Role clarity and purpose are essential factors in inoculating against difficult director behavior. A good chair is comfortable reminding the group why they are there and what their broader and unique responsibilities are so that they can easily point to those principles if or when board members spiral in the wrong direction. Some of the most complex and challenging topics directors face relate to divergent shareholder goals, family dynamics, or personnel issues. These topics require a deeper understanding of the motivations and incentives of the parties involved and a careful assessment of the risks and opportunities.

It is imperative that board chairs address the root cause of conflict and find solutions that align with the best interests of the company and its stakeholders. Such root causes may be related to personal motivations, individual personalities, issues around trust, power struggles, or other psychological factors. There are times when it is necessary to bring in external experts or advisors to navigate these complicated issues, which can ultimately lead to timelier resolution.

Managing difficult conversations in the boardroom can be a daunting task, but board chairs can use these tips to navigate them successfully and foster a culture of trust and collaboration among board members and stakeholders.

Russell Reynolds Associates is a NACD strategic content partner, providing directors with critical and timely information, and perspectives. Russell Reynolds Associates is a financial supporter of the NACD.

Authors

Richard Davis, PhD, is a seasoned industrial and organizational psychologist with extensive experience advising CEOs, private equity investors, and board directors.
Theodore L. Dysart is a managing director with Russell Reynolds, focused on placing board members and CEOs.
David Lange leads Russell Reynolds Associates' global development capability.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Private EquityPrivate CreditBoard of Directors

Why Athletes Make Effective Leaders

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices