Steady State of Change: European CFO Turnover in 2024 Maintains Record Pace | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Steady State of Change: CFO Turnover Maintains Record Pace

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

August 28, 2024

8 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

As European CFO turnover matches last year’s highs, RRA unpacks the trend and explores strategies for a seamless transition.

Close

Romain Clio

Brussels

Ben Jones

London

Suzzane Wood

London

69%

of CFOs have changed roles since 2020.

As European organizations navigate tumultuous macroeconomic trends, CFO retirements hit a five-year high, and turnover rates continue to break records, experienced financial leaders are few and far between. In fact, a staggering 69% of CFOs changed roles since 2020. This poses a significant risk to organizations looking to retain their CFOs in an increasingly competitive market.

To summarize the latest CFO turnover trends and gain insight into this aggressive market, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed the CFOs of European organizations from 2020 to H1 2024 (N=660). We found that:

CFO turnover remains high across the board, with a five-year high in the FTSE 250, SMI, and the OMX Helsinki

The majority of newly appointed CFOs (65%) are in the role for the first time

Succession is starting to pay off for women CFOs, with 56% of women appointed to the top job coming from within the organization

CFO retirement rates have sharply increased over the past five years, jumping eight percentage points since last year and a whopping 22 percentage points since 2020.

CFO turnover reached record highs for the second consecutive year

In H1 2024, European CFO turnover hit 8%, matching last year’s highs (Figure 1). Recent high levels of CFO turnover suggest that this trend has become the norm , due to increasing retirement rates, macroeconomic trends, and the fight for financial officer inclusion. This continuous churn creates new opportunities for next-generation finance talent, and is likely why most newly appointed CFOs are in the role for the first time (more on this in the next section).

Figure 1: YoY CFO turnover (2020 - H1 2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 N=660. (Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim. Some companies are multi-listed; turnover is accounted for across all indexes.)

The FTSE 250 and SMI have been particularly active, while the IBEX-35 and BEL-20 saw a decrease over the same period (Figure 2).  This turnover increase can be partly explained by unprecedented retirement rates for CFOs across Europe, varying LTIP performance, the push for greater inclusion in leadership teams, and the anticipated return of PE (which is attracting candidates from listed companies).

Figure 2: Trending CFO turnover by index (2020 - H1 2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 N=660. (Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim. Some companies are multi-listed; turnover is accounted for across all indexes.)

First time CFOs are still dominating the market

There continues to be more first-time CFOs in the European market (65%),   due to the record levels of CFOs retiring in 2024 and CFO succession plans coming to fruition. While 35% of organizations looking externally for their next CFO hired a leader with a proven track record, first-time talent gained ground, increasing 6-percentage points over the last year (Figure 3).

Figure 3: YoY internal versus external CFO appointments (2020 - H1 2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 N=660. (Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim. Some companies are multi-listed; turnover is accounted for across all indexes.)

Succession planning is paying off for women CFOs

Women now hold 21% of the CFO roles in the analyzed European indices, a record for women’s representation in the top financial job. These numbers will likely keep improving, as women CFO appointments increased by 13 percentage points over the last year (Figure 4).

Figure 4: YoY new women CFO appointments (2020 - H1 2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 N=660. (Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim. Some companies are multi-listed; turnover is accounted for across all indexes.)

What’s more, 56% of women CFOs appointed in 2024 were internal hires (Figure 5a), a 20-percentage point increase from the previous year and 82% of these women were in the CFO role for the first time (Figure 5b).  While there’s still work to do to achieve gender parity, these encouraging improvements indicate that organizations’ increased investments in succession planning and developing women in finance are helping to close the financial leadership gender gap.

Figure 5a: YoY internal versus external women CFO appointments (2020 – H1 2024)

Figure 5b: Women CFOs’ prior experience (2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 N=660. (Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim. Some companies are multi-listed; turnover is accounted for across all indexes.)

CFO retirement rates continue to be on the rise

Retirement rates reached a five-year high, increasing 8 percentage points to 54% in 2024 (Figure 6). On average, CFOs are retiring at age 55 and departing their CFO role after a 6.7 year tenure.

CFOs approaching retirement may not seek another CFO role due to factors like burnout, financial security, or simply deciding that retirement seems most attractive. Instead, many departing CFOs are leveraging their finance expertise in various board roles. This is especially common in the UK, where there are more opportunities to join boards as audit chairs or on remuneration commitees (where we have seen an increase of financial expertise), ultimately leading to chair positions (22% of current FTSE 350 chairs have CFO experience).

Figure 6: YoY CFO Departures (2020 - H1 2024)

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 N=660. (Note: Some retiring/departing CFO data is unavailable.)

As demand for experienced CFO talent remains high, there are ample opportunities for these leaders. Of the 67% of CFOs who made external moves, 75% have opted for another CFO role. Unsurprisingly, those who made internal moves all opted for broader, non-finance leadership roles, like CEO or COO roles (Figures 7 and 8). Half of transitioning CFOs are taking on the CEO and general management roles, up from 36% in 2023 (Figure 8). This highlights the need for new, challenging opportunities for CFOs.

Figure 7: H1 2024 European CFO Exits

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 N=660. (Note: Some retiring/departing CFO data is unavailable.)

Figure 8: Number of departing European CFOs per new role - H1 2024

Source: RRA analysis of the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024  N=660. (Note: Some retiring/departing CFO data is unavailable .)

Is your top finance talent planning an exit?

With CFO turnover remaining high, executives and board members who are invested in their organization’s CFO succession plan should ask: Am I taking actionable and targeted steps to prepare for my or my CFO’s exit?

When planning for your next financial leader, we recommend the following retention strategies:

Engage in ongoing career development conversations to retain your CFO: With CFOs increasingly looking externally for their next challenge, create new challenging opportunities within your company or risk losing your talent.

Plan for retirement: On average, CFOs retired at age 55 in 2024. Don’t be afraid to open a dialogue around your CFO’s retirement plans, as this allows them to be involved in planning for their own successor.

Continue to invest in succession planning: After engaging in career planning conversations with your CFO, re-assess your finance talent succession plan to ensure both timelines align. Given the lack of inclusion in financial talent pipelines, pay specific attention to developing and retaining women in finance. There’s always room to improve: consider whether you are looking deep enough into your organization, your assessment and development methodologies, and your overall transition plan.

CFO mentorship: With the majority of CFOs being in the role for the first time, newly appointed CFOs will be facing a host of new career challenges. The value of a trusted, independent mentor who brings specific executive experiences and has faced similar challenges is invaluable.

Check-in with underrepresented minorities: RRA’s H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor found that the top reasons underrepresented executives left their jobs were: career advancement, seeking new responsibilities, and seeking a different company culture. Create clear job paths for finance talent with multiple entry points and progression routes, making these paths visible to all  employees as part of onboarding and development conversations. Offering structured sponsorship programs that target underrepresented groups can help retain talent. Finally, ensure that you fully understand your organizational culture and URM finance leaders’ experiences within it.

Re-evaluate compensation: As experienced CFOs continue to be in demand during a difficult economic market, evaluate whether your compensation package is competitive. Sourcing market intelligence on similar organizations can shed light on what competitors might offer your CFO. Don’t let a slightly more competitive package lure your CFO talent away.

To complete this analysis, RRA analyzed Boardex data from the FTSE 350, BEL-20, CAC 40, DAX, IBEX 35, OMX Helsinki, OMX Stockholm, SMI, Euronext 100 from 2020 to H1 2024 (n=660).

Authors

Romain Clio co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' EMEA Financial Officers Practice. He is based in Brussels.
Ben Jones co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' EMEA Financial Officers Practice. He is based in London.
Mohammed Khan is a member of the Financial Officers Practice knowledge team at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in London.
Catherine Schroeder leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Toronto.
Suzzane Wood is a member of the EMEA Financial Officers Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in London.

Steady State of Change: CFO Turnover Maintains Record Pace

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices