Talent Motivation & Technology Innovation: Leisure & Hospitality’s New Landscape | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Talent Motivation & Technology Innovation: Leisure & Hospitality’s New Landscape

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsIndustry TrendsLeadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionCulture RiskCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerLeisure and HospitalityRetail and LuxuryBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersHuman Resources OfficersCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Article

July 01, 2024

7 min

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsIndustry TrendsLeadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionCulture RiskCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerLeisure and HospitalityRetail and LuxuryBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersHuman Resources OfficersCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

L&H industry faces talent and AI & tech challenges. Leaders must invest in retaining talent, succession planning, and AI & tech integration.

Close

Despite coming out of the pandemic and into a storm of consecutive crises—including macroeconomic challenges, geopolitical conflicts, and changing consumer behaviors—Leisure and Hospitality (L&H) remains a vibrant and resilient sector.

That said, these macro challenges have significantly impacted the industry, mainly through severe talent shortages, suppressed consumer spending due to inflation, and limited succession pipelines. To support L&H leaders in addressing these challenges, Russell Reynolds Associates interviewed 10 CEOs from the cruise, hotel, restaurant, entertainment parks space, identifying learnings and recommendations for the future across two major themes:

Addressing the leisure & hospitality talent shortage

AI’s implications for the hospitality industry

Addressing the leisure and hospitality talent shortage

Over the past few years, the industry's biggest challenge has not been attracting customers but finding and retaining the front line workforce. After COVID-induced mass layoffs and furloughs, the L&H industry faces continued talent shortages, as many workers sought employment in other sectors that allowed for flexible or remote work. Numerous interviewees noted that outflow has severely limited the L&H talent pool and resulted in major gaps in their organization’s talent development, knowledge transfer, and succession planning efforts.

It’s very painful to find talent post-Covid. There’s been a hard shift; people no longer want to spend 10 years working their way up in an organization.

Candidates—particularly young ones—are willing to sacrifice on location or comforts to move up or gain novel experiences.”

Joss Kent
&Beyond, Exec. Chairman & CEO

There has also been a cultural shift within L&H talent pipelines. Traditional movement up the corporate ladder is now in conflict with the “fast returns” of other career paths, making L&H teams more challenging to build and retain. This can have a major impact on guest experience, as hospitality relies heavily on “training on the job.” While some skills can be taught, learning how to anticipate guest’s wants and moods requires time and real-world experience.

To address this, interviewees noted offering more competitive wages and benefits, providing flexible work schedules, and offering perks like free or low-cost accommodations. For the next generation of leaders in particular, they are investing in vocational training centers, development programs, sponsorship and mentorship opportunities with senior leaders, and rotational partnerships with other organizations.

Fill the gap by surrounding yourself with talent from different generations. Don’t be embarrassed to tell them you don’t understand something. Trust and empower them.”

Olivier Chavy
The Lux Collective, CEO

Additionally, these CEOs also noted the importance of developing succession plans at every level of organization, both at corporate and on property. Succession efforts show leaders across the organization that their work is recognized, appreciated, and building towards a clear career path forward—while also ensuring that key knowledge stays within the organization.

Today, leaders in the L&H industry’s number one focus is identifying and retaining top talent who have a passion for hospitality work. The new L&H career path requires a new talent strategy for the future.

AI’s implications for leisure & hospitality: A mix of optimism and uncertainty

For our interviewees, artificial intelligence represents both a massive opportunity and a looming unknown. From social media revolutionizing how brands build relationships with consumers to the recent generative AI proliferation, leaders have never had to adapt so quickly to technology-driven consumer behaviors. Within leisure and hospitality organizations, AI is being leveraged to provide benefits like contactless services (including mobile check-ins, digital keys, or voice-controlled room automation) and better storage and usage of guest data to create more personalized experiences.

AI is an amazing opportunity but also presents a lot of dangers. The opportunity to generate content is fantastic, but it could also infringe trademark laws or concerns about content ownership. Everyone speaks about AI, but they’re also still trying to understand what it means. It’s still evolving.”

Barbara Muckerman
Kempinski Hotels, Group CEO

That said, many L&H CEOs remain skeptical. While most consumer leaders believe that a strong understanding of generative AI will be a required skill for the future C-suite, our recent Global Leadership Monitor shows that few—only 34%--feel confident in their personal abilities to implement these tools in their organization. Additionally, their views on their organization’s capabilities are even more dire, with only 19% of consumer leaders agreeing that they have the right people in-house required to implement generative AI solutions and only 17% agreeing that they have the right expertise on the board to advise on generative AI implementation.

Only

17%

of all consumer leaders agree that their organization has the right expertise on the board to advise on generative AI implementation

Our interviewees reiterated this combination of optimism and uncertainty, comparing AI’s explosion to sustainability’s a decade ago. (This insight aligns with our recent research on the ROI of Responsible AI, which explores leveraging the connections between sustainability and AI to create enterprise value.) When discussing AI’s long-term implications, interviewees voiced concerns around issues like GenAI bots producing content that infringes on trademark laws, guest data privacy, and overall impacts on an already unstable workforce. Looking to the future, these L&H CEOs are aiming to embrace tech-enabled change while balancing responsible and transparent AI strategy implementation.

What’s next for leisure & hospitality?

While related to the trends and recommendations uncovered in our recent article on leadership trends within CPG leadership, the leisure & hospitality industry is facing unique challenges of its own—from talent shortages to guest interaction with new technologies. Looking forward, L&H leaders can consider the following:

Invest in succession planning at every level: Our recent research shows how vital succession planning is to staying competitive and maintaining a robust leadership pipeline, particularly within the hospitality space. Not only that, but long-term succession planning at every level helps improve DEI outcomes. To address the industry’s talent shortage, leaders should invest in and communicate around robust succession plans at every level, creating clear (yet flexible) success profiles, leveraging career planning platforms, and prioritizing hospitality-centric behaviors that can’t be taught.

Define and communicate leadership development pathways: Our Monitor shows that, while 86% of L&H leaders want to take on more responsibility in the next two to three years, only 43% see a clear path to a larger role that would provide said responsibilities. Ensure that development programs are clearly articulated and communicated to everyone in the organization. Investing in leaders’ development plans via targeted accelerators, mentorship and sponsorship programs, and targeted accelerators will help retain top performers.

Align technology investments with your organization’s overall strategy: As your organization investigates how it will best leverage AI, ensure that the investment and implementation is in line with your organization’s growth and talent strategies. The rise of AI isn’t just about implementing a new tool—we are in the realm of full business model transformation. AI strategy loses its meaning without a capable execution team. As such, it’s key to have a clear-eyed view on which capabilities your organization has in-house, where any gaps may occur, and how your talent strategy needs to adapt to your future-state goals.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we can help your organization to succeed by:

Identifying and investing in the right leaders for your board or C-suite, using our decades of executive search experience

Carefully examining the capabilities of your existing board or C-suite and benchmarking them against the current market

Carrying out executive assessments, which evaluate your executive team’s leadership approaches and their likely impacts, strengths, and areas for improvement

Conducting psychometric testing to better understand your leadership team’s instincts, traits, and any potential behavioral derailers

Helping you develop a deeper understanding of your C-suite capabilities, uncovering and addressing potential gaps with our C-suite success experts

Authors

Hoda Tahoun is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector and leads the Leisure & Hospitality practice. She is based in Miami.

David Torres leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Consumer Knowledge. He is based in London.

Talent Motivation & Technology Innovation: Leisure & Hospitality’s New Landscape

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices