How AI can supercharge your P&L outcomes | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How AI can supercharge your P&L outcomes

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial Intelligence

Article

September 13, 2024

3 min

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial Intelligence

Executive Summary

Businesses are moving into the next stage of the AI maturity cycle. Where should you deploy AI across the organization and for what purpose?

Close

Everyone, from furniture companies in the middle of Iowa to Silicon Valley giants, are trying to make sense of how GenAI will impact their business.

Birju Shah, Ex-Head of Uber AI and Professor of Product Management and AI at Kellogg School of Management, and Harpreet Khurana, Chief Digital and Data Analytics Officer at Russell Reynolds Associates, explain why leaders must reframe their thinking around AI to capture and create value.

A new approach to AI

At the beginning of the current AI hype-cycle, CEOs were expected to simply ‘get on the AI bandwagon,’ without any follow-up questions on its progress or effectiveness. That’s not the case anymore.

The honeymoon phase is over, and we’re moving into the next stage of the AI maturity cycle. In this article, we’re answering the question leaders are asking: where should you deploy AI across the organization and for what purpose?

Too often, the answer to this question is to adopt piecemeal pilots or projects that seek to cram AI into existing strategies and processes. Yet, as the old adage goes: pouring new technology on broken old processes creates expensive broken old processes.

It’s time to reframe this perspective and adopt an enterprise mindset around AI. One way to do that is to put AI in the context of your P&L––and understand how AI can impact your business’s financial health.

Here’s what we mean: every line on your profit and loss sheet can be mined for efficiency and opportunity—key areas that AI can unlock (we’ve illustrated an example in the picture below). When leaders apply a P&L lens to AI, it transforms AI from being a shiny mantlepiece ornament into a value-driving, ‘show-me-the-money’ capability.

There are two levels to putting your AI P&L to work: value capture and value creation.

Value capture with AI

Value capture means extracting more efficiency from your current business processes. And if every P&L line item can be viewed as a set of smaller tasks, then AI can be a potent tool for value capture.

The majority of companies using AI are doing exactly that, using AI to optimize rules-based tasks within their organization—customer service, outbound and inbound marketing, sales, and internal shared service platforms.

For example, a typical wealth manager overseeing $1 billion in assets across 50 to 150 clients can use AI to cover 3-4x the numbers of clients and assets. AI can help tailor highly personalized investment advice, automate portfolio balancing, and provide sophisticated tracking of holdings—a task beyond the reach of a single human.

But using AI just to capture value is just the first step in the journey.

Value creation with AI

AI’s value creation potential is what sets it apart from previous tech leaps. It’s not just able to help you become more efficient, it can help you grow.

Make no mistake: value creation is an existential issue. If your competitors are using AI to find new opportunities, what you have to offer might no longer be relevant.

That’s why we’re already seeing the pharmaceutical industry use generative AI in their research and development processes to shorten drug discovery timescales and transform the efficiency of clinical trials.

According to the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development, it takes, on average, 10 years and $1.4 billion in out-of-pocket costs to bring a single drug to market, and about 80% of those costs are associated with clinical development.

But McKinsey research finds that models can help researchers cut drug discovery timelines in half by using generative AI models to complete tasks like analyzing microscopy and pathology data and perform in-silico experiments.

Leaders shouldn’t just look at the costs AI can help them save but at the innovation AI can uncover, too.

How to transform your P&L with AI

GenAI projects are somewhat unique in that they are relatively easy to get started across your organization.  The relative ease can belie the complexity of driving meaningful ROI beyond the early honeymoon phase. The key to successful AI adoption is to approach it strategically rather than trying to implement it all at once.

It’s useful to think about AI applications at three levels. From there you can decide on the outcome-based use cases you want to target against your P&L.

1. Portfolio / Task-level: This is AI as an assistant for small, mundane / no-joy work tasks.

Purpose: Enhance daily productivity by automating mundane tasks.

Example: Using AI to summarize meetings or generate checklists, which boosts efficiency without fundamentally changing business processes.

Impact: Incremental productivity gains that assist existing workflows.

2. Program / Department-level: This is AI as augmentation for human-driven processes.

Purpose: Create significant value by augmenting human efforts with AI.

Example: Functional processes could get a facelift with AI augmentation, think marketing departments validating product imagery against product information systems, HR departments rethinking employee onboarding with an always-on onboarding bot, sales reps getting questions answered on sales quotas or commissions.

Impact: Enhanced value creation through improved processes and outcomes within specific departments. Klarna, for example, says it cut sales and marketing spending by 11% in the first quarter of 2024 by making tasks such as creating images and translating copy more efficient.

3. Platform / System-level: This is AI as an agitator that can transform entire business units.

Purpose: Transform or reconfigure entire operations by integrating AI at a systemic level.

Example: AI’s ability to speed up drug discovery using existing clinical datasets.

Impact: This changes the nature of R&D forever, impacting the process and outcomes of drug discovery. Insilico Medicine, for example, leveraged predictive AI technology to bring a drug candidate for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) to the threshold of Phase II development in just 18 months.

By adopting a surgical approach to AI, leaders can effectively transform their P&L, driving both immediate and long-term benefits.

Summary

Using AI to supercharge your P&L is not just about adopting new technology. It's about fundamentally rethinking how AI can upgrade every facet of your business operations.

As AI matures, so should our thinking on how best to deploy this platform at scale. While value capture is a good near-term goal, without value creation, the sustained impact of the AI investment will not show up on the P&L.

Leaders need to start positioning their AI strategies to account for both those value buckets – and they need to do it today.

Authors

Birju Shah, Ex-Head of Uber AI and Professor of Product Management and AI at Kellogg School of Management.
Harpreet Khurana, Chief Digital and Data Analytics Officer at Russell Reynolds Associates.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices