Maximizing Opportunity, Minimizing Risk:  The Board’s Role in AI and Sustainability | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Maximizing Opportunity, Minimizing Risk:  The Board’s Role in AI and Sustainability

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationLeadershipBoard of DirectorsTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersSustainability OfficersBoard Effectiveness

Article

June 07, 2024

4 min

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationLeadershipBoard of DirectorsTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersSustainability OfficersBoard Effectiveness

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Boards building new governance structures for AI should learn from the experience of governing another transformative issue: sustainability.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

Laura Mantoura

Stamford

Artificial intelligence has emerged as a pressing issue for boards that demands new approaches to governance to ensure that companies are seizing opportunities for value creation, while minimizing enterprise risk. AI technologies possess the potential to revolutionize industries, disrupt traditional business models, and profoundly alter long-term strategies for growth.

Only

20%

of leaders agree that their company’s board has the right expertise to advise on generative AI implementation

As boards navigate the complexities of AI adoption, they are confronted with myriad challenges, including ethical considerations, legal implications, data privacy concerns and the need for transparent decision-making processes. However, Russell Reynolds Associates’ latest Global Leadership Monitor shows that boards are not prepared to address these challenges – only 30% of board directors believe their organization has the right expertise on the board to advise on generative AI implementation. And management teams feel even less confident, with only 20% of leaders agreeing that their board has the right expertise in place.

To address this gap, boards will benefit from looking at the experience of governing a similarly transformative issue: sustainability. While the two may not seem immediately connected, both require paradigm shifts in how businesses operate, how leaders manage, and how boards govern. Moreover, both can create significant enterprise value when implemented effectively – but can also destroy significant value if mishandled.

Corporate boards therefore have a responsibility to ensure they are effectively monitoring the risks and opportunities posed by AI and sustainability, and helping management to prioritize and triage as necessary. Importantly, providing such effective oversight does not require deep technical knowledge of either subject, nor does it benefit from the appointment of so-called “single issue directors” whose primary role on the board is to serve as subject-matter expert on sustainability or AI. Rather, the board will benefit from adding directors with lived experience managing these topics in a business environment, and must adhere to a consistent and coordinated process that clearly delineates the board and management’s responsibilities in transforming their business and operating models in response to these disruptive forces.

Why boards and management teams must work together to drive sustainability and AI progress

Recent RRA research shows that a coordinated relationship between the board and management team is essential for creating sustainability strategies that create both social and financial value for stakeholders. As AI grows more accessible and makes its way into the boardroom, it’s clear that the same collaborative oversight will be required to capture AI opportunities while minimizing the significant risks.

That’s because the emergence of generative AI poses many of the same governance risks and opportunities that companies have already begun to face with sustainability.

Each require that a company’s management and board build a collaborative process to:

Develop a clear understanding of its primary stakeholders (for example, employees, customers, investors, suppliers, society-at-large), and what matters most to them;

Continuously scan the market to identify previously unrecognized risks and opportunities related to sustainability and AI;

Ultimately, identify how to turn risk into opportunity, driving value creation.

In such a collaborative process, the board and management each play distinct roles that build upon each other to drive effective governance. At every step, each group leverages their distinct perspective, skillset, and mandate to lay another plank in the governance scaffolding that protects the company and its stakeholders’ interests.

Importantly, this coordinated approach does not imply that the board should not constructively challenge management’s position or provide alternative views. Rather, by adhering to a well-defined and coordinated approach, both “sides of the house” can ensure they are delivering on their mandate and serving their intended governance roles.

When the board and management partnership works well, sustainability and AI can be fully integrated into the business as levers for value creation. When the board and management struggle to reach alignment, sustainability and AI efforts risk becoming disjointed or unsuccessful bolt-ons to existing workflows, rather than tools for rethinking business and operating models.

Regional and local laws, as well as directives and corporate governance guidelines, must be considered as boards define their fiduciary responsibilities.

If companies need to make decisions before regulations have been finalized, they should adopt a principles-based approach to mitigate the need for future backtracking.

The board’s responsibilities for governing sustainability and AI

Board directors should focus their sustainability and AI oversight broadly on four key responsibilities, each of which complement the corresponding responsibilities of management:

Educating

Integrating

Overseeing

Ratifying

Educate

Educate directors on material risks and opportunities related to sustainability and AI, equipping them to productively contribute to their company’s strategy discussions.

Leaders at the very top of the organization will not be expected to have deep technical knowledge of AI or sustainability concepts. However, they are responsible for understanding 1) how both can add value and mitigate risk across the value chain, 2) what AI is capable of and where it should—or should not—be deployed, 3) the risks associated with AI and sustainability, and most importantly 4) the risks of doing nothing.

Effective governance of sustainability and AI requires that boards have clear understanding of who the company’s core stakeholders are, and how its choices can both create value for those stakeholders – or deliver unintended consequences. Those unintended consequences include AI’s potential for perpetuating bias in the data sets on which it has been trained, or the environmental impacts of a company’s operations and supply chain.

It’s vital that this process involves a range of stakeholder perspectives, reflecting myriad points of view on the subjects of both sustainability and AI. These viewpoints are likely to shift on a regional and temporal basis, particularly as companies move through various points of the business cycle. As directors engage with these various stakeholder perspectives, retaining a long-term lens will be crucial for avoiding the “quarterly results” trap that diminishes many companies’ ability to make progress.

As the primary advocate for and conduit to a company’s stakeholders, the chief sustainability officer or equivalent senior leader can help the board identify, prioritize, and better understand the needs of various stakeholder groups, ensuring that the board is accurately assessing the potential risks and rewards of any strategic decision.

Integrate

To manage risk and make strategic decisions, integrate sustainability and AI strategy into board discussions, processes, and systems.

To truly capture the potential value of sustainability and AI, while mitigating corresponding risks, both topics must be integrated into all risk management and strategic decision-making processes. Treating them as siloed topics to be considered at static points throughout the board’s calendar will result in a fractured and ineffective governance approach. Instead, they must become cross-cutting themes that are considered by the entire board, in every discussion (as opposed to being subjugated to committee oversight alone). That said, each committee will apply their own lens to each topic (see the “How sustainability and AI can be integrated into board committee responsibilities” box below).

While the specific approaches will vary from board to board, all directors should be on the lookout for opportunities to bring a sustainability or AI innovation lens to strategic conversations. This may include making both topics an integral part of the CEO’s updates to the board; holding regular discussions between the board, CEO, and senior executives like the chief sustainability or chief digital officers; and identifying how each board committee will hold itself accountable for integrating a sustainability and AI innovation lens into their work.

How sustainability and AI can be integrated into board committee responsibilities:

Nomination Committee

Include expertise on enterprise-relevant sustainability and AI issues in the board of directors’ competency profile

Make sustainable leadership and a commitment to Responsible AI a key component for CEO and senior management succession and appointments

Audit Committee

Educate the committee around non-financial disclosure requirements

Ensure that governance and audit mechanisms include assessment of adherence to company’s Responsible AI principles

Compensation Committee

Orient compensation structure to the sustainable and long-term development of the company

Link CEO and management compensation to ambitious sustainability targets

Ensure senior technical leaders are incentivized to prioritize Responsible AI practices

Oversee

In partnership with the management team, oversee key sustainability and AI risks, opportunities, and KPIs on an ongoing basis.

While it’s important that the board and management collaborate around sustainability and AI, it’s equally critical that the board recognize its ultimate responsibility in holding management to account for its responsibilities and commitments.

Therefore, the board and management team must agree on clear metrics to track progress towards sustainability and Responsible AI goals, as well as a regular metrics review schedule that aligns with the board’s broader financial reviews. The board should also consider its oversight of company culture, and the extent to which externally stated values and commitments around sustainability and Responsible AI align with the lived experience of employees at all levels of the organization.

Ratify

Ratify management’s sustainability and Responsible AI metrics and related disclosures.

As the company’s ultimate fiduciary, the board is responsible for authorizing and endorsing public commitments and disclosures related to sustainability and AI. Doing so visibly and enthusiastically showcases company commitments and progress to investors, customers, employees, and policymakers, while simultaneously communicating the seriousness and authenticity of their strategies.

Boards should validate and publicly champion decisions made by the management team regarding their company’s sustainability and AI journey. This includes reporting on progress, ideally via within major disclosures like the annual report. Demonstrating this accountability to all stakeholders will be crucial.

Advice to boards for a sustainable, AI-enabled future

Regardless of where boards fall in the maturity curve of sustainability and AI governance, we recommend the following key actions to elevate the board’s oversight and ability to leverage the transformational impact of these forces:

Ensure that senior management and the board are clear on their respective roles in driving change and mitigating risk when it comes to sustainability and AI.

Don’t rely on single-issue directors to fill the board’s expertise gap – instead, look for opportunities to educate the entire board on the company’s stakeholders, their priorities, and how the company creates value for them.

Integrate sustainability and AI into all risk management and strategic decision-making processes, such that they become a lens for identifying opportunity and risk.

Establish clear metrics for holding management to account against the company’s sustainability and AI ambitions, and review progress regularly.

Publicly champion decisions made by the management team regarding their company’s sustainability and AI journey, demonstrating board support for the company’s ambitions.

When aligned, sustainability and AI become powerful levers for value creation. It's time to embrace the transformational power of these two forces, and reshape how companies approach their governance.

Authors

Kurt Harrison co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice. He is based in New York.
Laura Mantoura is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory practice. She is based in New York.
Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.

Maximizing Opportunity, Minimizing Risk: The Board’s Role in AI and Sustainability

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices