Swiss Executive Committee Landscape: Increased Focus on Sustainability, While Progress Toward Gender Parity Stalls | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Swiss Executive Committee Landscape: Increased Focus on Sustainability, While Progress Toward Gender Parity Stalls

Industry TrendsNext Generation BoardsBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsInclusion and Culture

Article

May 08, 2024

4 min

Industry TrendsNext Generation BoardsBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

The 5 CEO Imperatives at RRA: Forging purpose & vision, driving strategic results, leading leaders, influencing with impact, and resilience.

Close

Corrado Menghini

Zurich

Alexandra Ettlin

Zurich

Every year, Russell Reynolds Associates analyses the composition of management boards in the SMI and SMIM. Our 2024 analysis reveals some interesting trends, including:

Despite excellent progress in recent years, women’s representation on the executive committees of SMI-listed companies is stagnating.

Women are leaving management boards much sooner than their male counterparts.

Sustainability is increasingly becoming a business focus, with 95% of SMI companies linking remuneration to ESG targets.

One in five of the largest listed Swiss companies either changed their CEO or announced they were planning to.

Gender diversity in the SMI stagnates while the SMIM makes progress

In recent years, the proportion of women in the executive committees of SMI companies almost doubled – from 13% in 2021 to 24% in 2023. While this is positive news, our 2024 analysis revealed that, although women accounted for 39% of new appointees, 28% of the members leaving SMI executive committees over the same period were women. Including index composition changes, women’s representation stagnated at 24.3% last year (Figure 1).

Conversely, the proportion of women on SMIM executive committees has increased by 5.8% percentage points to 20.5%. While the proportion of women was still below that of SMI companies, good progress is being made.

Women are leaving SMI and SMIM executive management roles nearly twice as fast as their male counterparts

Women executives are leaving office much sooner than their male counterparts. While women who left top management roles in 2023 had been in office for an average of 3.4 years, the men served average terms of 6.6 years – almost double the time (Figure 2). In fact, none of the 14 women who left in 2023 had been in office for more than 6 years.

This is not unique to Swiss executive teams—we have observed similar trends on DAX 40 management boards, suggesting this trend may be occurring across different layers of leadership.

SMI and SMIM companies also follow similar patterns when it comes to the distribution of executive management roles, with women typically being appointed to head roles with an over-proportional share of women in the workforce, such as HR and legal. There are still relatively few women on SMI boards with direct P&L responsibility, and numbers of women CFOs are also decreasing (Figure 3). There have, however, been more women CFOs appointed in SMIM companies.

As sustainability gains focus, nearly all SMI companies linked remuneration to ESG targets

The importance of sustainability in SMI companies continues to increase, with 95% of companies making manager’s remuneration dependent upon achieving environmental, sustainability, and social targets. This is a major increase from 75% in 2022 and 40% in 2021.

Almost a third of SMI companies have also appointed a chief sustainability officer – increasing from four to six companies in the past year. There is also a small increase among SMIM-quoted companies: one more company, or 11% in total.

This increase comes on the heels of Swiss companies setting more ambitious sustainability targets. UBS plans to invest CHF 400 billion in sustainable investments by 2025 and reduce emissions from its operations to net zero. And we are seeing these investments translate into corporate action.

For example, at Lonza, members of the executive committee are each responsible for delivering one of seven UN sustainability goals. The company also plans to increase the representation of women in management to 35% by 2035, and to reduce its industrial water consumption by 50% by 2030.

Massive shifts to CEO landscape

Our study found that one in five of the largest listed Swiss companies has either changed its CEO or has initiated a CEO change over the last 12 months. This reflects the recent trend of high CEO turnover globally. As a result, boards should be doubling down on their succession planning, if they aren’t already.

Cornelia Tänzler, Partner at Russell Reynolds Associates, suggests “the results reflect that during the pandemic, economic uncertainties and geopolitical crisis, continuity and stability have been paramount and firms have focused on steadying the ship. Since 2023, we are seeing companies recalibrate, turning their focus to the longer-term growth-orientated planning and anticipating major market shifts. Accordingly, Swiss Board of Directors are carefully considering whether they have the right leadership teams in place.”

To receive a more comprehensive copy of the study or to talk about some of the findings, please reach out to our team.

Authors

Corrado Menghini leads the Swiss office and is a member of the Board & CEO Advisory Partners team at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in Zurich.
Cornelia Tänzler is a senior member of the Board & CEO Advisory Partners team at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in Zurich & Geneva.

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Online Grocery Spiked During COVID-19. What Now?

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices