Surviving CFO Turnover: Lessons from Companies that Nailed Succession Planning | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Surviving CFO Turnover: Lessons from Companies that Nailed Succession Planning

SuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 2 authors

October 11, 2023

4 min

SuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Russell Reynolds Associates’ interviewed current and former executives on their CFO succession plans.

Close

Jim Lawson

New York

Clare Metcalf

Chicago

Linda Barham

Chicago

Ben Jones

London

Marla Oates

Houston
Austin

Failing to plan for succession poses significant risks

While all C-suite changes influence organizations’ financial and operating performance, CFO departures are perhaps the most impactful. As an integral executive management team member, the CFO serves as a business partner to operational leaders, a trusted advisor to the CEO, and an active participant in the board and investor community. Accordingly, as referenced by the Wall Street Journal, hasty CFO departures can cause an organization’s share price to decline, as it can be a bellwether to investors about its stability.1

Mitigating the risk of an unforeseen departure has become increasingly important. Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor found that 40% of sitting CFOs are very likely/likely to make a career change today. Yet despite its importance, many organizations are not approaching succession planning effectively. Our monitor also found that organizations are 2x more likely to have an informal, reactionary approach to succession planning than a formal, proactive one.

This lack of planning opens organizations up to inordinate risk, given the connection between the CFO and market, financial, and operating performance. To better understand best-in-class succession transitions, we interviewed ten current and former executives and board members whose organizations have developed robust CFO succession plans. Read on as we delve into their methods for assessing, identifying, developing, and transitioning potential CFO successors, as well as their advice for boards and the C-suite beginning their succession planning journey.

CFO succession planning — better late than never

Formal succession planning is started three to five years before a contemplated transition and, at a minimum, two to three years prior. The new CFO’s arrival is a trigger for an organization to evaluate its finance function, focusing on bridging existing gaps and formalizing development plans.

Remember, CFO succession planning doesn’t just fall to the CHRO; numerous stakeholders are involved (Figure 1). The CEO and board—notably, the audit committee chair—have a duty to contribute to succession efforts, given the importance of their relationships with the CFO. In fact, public company CFOs themselves should be involved not only to benefit the organization but also to benefit their own development, helping them achieve their career goals on their personal timelines.

Figure 1. Key CFO Succession Planning Stakeholders

The 5 key CFO competencies you can’t ignore

The ideal CFO success profile is iterative and should be reviewed annually (best practice is quarterly). While success factors are unique to an organization’s strategy and context, interviewees consistently identified five competencies as critical to becoming a CFO (Figure 2):

Foundational finance skills to execute

True business partner to the CEO

Ability to manage and influence stakeholders

Disposition to lead with gravitas

Lifelong learner

Figure 2. The top five competencies of CFO successors

A succession plan outlines a clear plan, but also provides an opportunity to adjust

Just as the success profile is iterative, the CFO succession planning process outlines a clear plan within talent management practices but leaves space to adjust. Interviewees shared their best practices when it came to assessing and selecting both internal and external succession candidates:

Assess against the success profile

"The best assessment tools are the ones that provoke the right discussion about the candidate and not where you run the test and its thumbs up or thumbs down”

- Former Fortune 1000 CFO and Board Member.

There are a variety of assessments to choose from. Regardless of the type, ensure they aren’t used as criteria for promotion and to disqualify succession candidates from the process, but to be foundational and informative to mentoring and development plans.

Select two or three internal succession candidates*

Using the information you’ve gathered from your assessments and performance reviews, host calibration sessions with key stakeholders to identify two to three internal successors and understand their development needs and time to readiness.

Identify an emergency succession candidate. No matter how much you plan, things can always go awry. Ensure an emergency succession plan is in place for an interim CFO in the unfortunate event you have an unexpected departure.

*While ideally, you want two to three internal successors, sometimes your bench strength isn’t as robust as desired. In that case, assessing whether you have the runway to develop those gaps on your team immediately or whether you must hire externally is paramount. RRA’s turnover data suggests that hiring a CFO successor less than two years before the succession is often too short of a window to onboard and appropriately develop an external hire.

From planning to action: How to ensure a seamless transition

From the identification of candidates to a successful transition, your biggest hurdle will be consistently recognizing, empowering, and coaching your internal candidates to the top seat. Below are the top five points of advice to ensure success from development to transition.

1.	Execute and monitor development plans

Once gaps are identified, create individual development plans and identify critical trends for potential cohort development opportunities. Expose internal candidates to situations where they will build these competencies, then coach them to success.

The top developmental experiences across our interviewee’s approaches included:

Business rotation outside of finance: Business acumen is foundational to being a partner to the CEO. A rotational role outside of finance in sales, internationally, or operations can fast-track a succession candidate’s knowledge.

Board exposure: Having candidates present to the board can be great exposure to the board and a learning experience for the candidate.

Rotational roles within finance: Create rotational roles where successors need to develop. For instance, a stint in investor relations is often considered an essential rotation to gain experience with the investor community.

A CFO mentor: A newly appointed CFO will be challenged beyond anything they have experienced earlier in their career. The value of a trusted, independent mentor who brings specific executive experiences and has faced similar challenges is invaluable.

2.	Engage and retain your succession candidates

Your CFO succession candidates should know they are being considered for the top job. Consistently recognizing, empowering, and coaching them is critical for retention.

"Be especially cautious with your ready-now successors: If they are truly ready now, they are better off going elsewhere if they aren’t being engaged in a thoughtful succession process.”

- Former Fortune 100 CFO and Fortune 50 Board Member

3.	The future CFO’s skillset may not look like the current CFO’s

When selecting your CFO successor, the next CFO may need a different skill set than the current CFO. When defining the success profile, be clear on where the company is today, and ask if the focus is on what is needed today or what is needed in the future. For example, our recent research found that big four accounting experience—once the gold standard for top public company CFOs—is becoming less prevalent, as CFOs with an investment banking background are trending given the focus on capital allocation and financial strategy.

4.	Communicate your career plan with intention

Engage in ongoing development conversations with your CFO and continuously plan based on their career goals and timelines. Open communication with key stakeholders (the board, CEO, CHRO, and investors) will ensure the transition goes as seamlessly as possible.

5.	While an overlap might sound good on paper, it doesn’t always work in practice

Ideally, a thoughtful overlapping period enables the incoming CFO to quickly get up to speed. However, a prolonged overlap can be hard for the incoming CFO if it goes on too long, as it prohibits them from taking the reigns and could impact the new CFO’s credibility with key stakeholders.

If an overlap is deemed necessary, the prior CFO should act solely as an advisor in the background and should not be involved in the day-to-day. If the departing CFO is remaining at the company in another position, make introductions with all key stakeholders and have the incumbent fully transitioned into the role to avoid confusion amongst the leadership team.

Invest in a CFO succession plan today

Neglecting CFO succession planning carries many risks for organizations – engaging an experienced partner to meet you where you are in your CFO succession journey can prevent costly business disruptions.

A proven methodology to identify and assess your succession candidates and the success profile needed for tomorrow can ensure you find the best fit for now and that your future company’s financial steward can navigate what’s yet to come.

Our verifiable process for identifying a successful CFO

Appendix

Our insights would not be possible without our esteemed participants' generous time and input.

Judy Bruner Retired CFO for SanDisk, Audit Committee Chair and Member for Applied Materials, Qorvo, Rapid7, and Seagate Technology
Andrew Clarke Former CFO for CH Robinson
Kathy Crusco Retired CFO for Epicor Solutions, Audit Committee Chair and Member for Calix, Inc, TD SYNNEX, Acumatica, Code42, and Bonterra, Board Advisor for Corel Corporation
Dan Comas Retired CFO for Danaher, Board Member for Fortive and Veralto
Chris Hix Retired CFO and Current Advisor for Enovis, Board Member, ESAB
Georganne Hodges Retired CFO for Motiva, Audit Committee Chair and Member for PBF Energy, TransAlta, and BWC Terminals
Cathie Lesjak Retired CFO for HP, Audit Committee Chair and Member for GE HealthCare and PROS Holdings, Audit Member for General Electric
Stefan Schulz CFO, PROS Holdings, Board Member for Outreach Corporation
Tom Sweet Retired CFO for Dell, Board Member for Trimble

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Americas Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Chicago.
Ben Jones co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' EMEA Financial Officers Practice. He is based in London.
Mohammed Khan is a member of the Financial Officers Practice Knowledge team at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in London.
Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. He is based in New York.
Clare Metcalf is a member of the Financial Officers Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in Chicago.
Marla Oates is a member of the Financial Officers Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in Houston.
Catherine Schroeder leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Toronto.

References

1. Stuart, Alix, “A quick CFO Exit Can Spell Trouble”; Wall Street Journal, Newspaper. New York: Wall Street Journal, 2016. Website. https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-quick-cfo-exit-can-spell-trouble-1470068396 (accessed Jul. 27, 2023).

2. Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor

3. The Evolving Academy Finance Landscape | Russell Reynolds Associates

Surviving CFO Turnover

Lessons from Companies that Nailed Succession Planning

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Speak to a consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices