The Leadership Tapestry of Industrial Portfolio Companies | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Leadership Tapestry of Industrial Portfolio Companies

Industry TrendsPortfolio Company LeadershipIndustrialPrivate CapitalTeam Performance

Article

Sarabeth Tukey

December 14, 2023

7 min

Industry TrendsPortfolio Company LeadershipIndustrialPrivate CapitalTeam Performance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We examined the talent trends in today’s industrial portfolio market. Here’s what they mean for leaders.

Close

Sarabeth Tukey

New York

As the landscape of private equity value creation evolves, the shift away from financial engineering towards operational improvement requires portfolio company management teams that are capable of executing at a higher level than ever before.

To better understand this evolution within the industrial sector, Russell Reynolds Associates conducted an analysis of our recent successful placements within  North American   private equity (PE) portfolio companies, learning that:

PE firms are looking beyond the traditional domain for talent

Step up candidates are becoming more prevalent

Prior PE experience is no longer a must-have  for success

PE firms must look beyond the CEO role for value creation

Challenges on the path to value creation

Economic tides continue to rapidly shift, finding the right talent remains a challenge for private equity portfolio companies. As holding periods extend, talent availability remains tight, and the risks around retention and burnout increase, PE firms must be more proactive in addressing these challenges to ensure a successful exit.

According to RRA’s Global Leadership Monitor, 58% of industrial leaders are looking to move beyond their current roles. Additionally, recent AlixPartners research found that approximately 75% of CEOs exit after a change in control.1 Surprisingly, 54% of these exits occur one to two years following the transaction, and are most often initiated by the CEOs themselves.  The consequences of unplanned CEO turnover are not to be underestimated, as they cause significant disruption within the organization. A substantial 46% of PE firms revealed that such unplanned CEO turnover erodes the rate of return on their investments. Furthermore, a staggering 83% of them stated that unplanned CEO turnover leads to longer investment hold times.

These statistics serve as a stark reminder of the detrimental effects of unplanned CEO turnover. They highlight the critical importance of strategic alignment and expectations between the sponsors and the CEO. Nearly 17% of portfolio company executives have expressed experiencing major operational challenges due to a clash of working styles with their PE investors.   1

What do tight markets mean for the PE industrial CEO talent pool?

As the PE playbook evolves, so must the industrial portfolio company CEO. An analysis of Russell Reynold’s CEO placements in industrial portfolio companies shows that the successful candidate is often not a traditional match.

Talent comes from beyond the traditional industry domain

In order to source high-quality talent, private equity firms must remain open-minded about looking outside of their primary industry. We are seeing a growing migration of talent between subsectors.
In our analysis of RRA’s industrial portfolio company placements in the US, two-thirds of CEOs came from outside of the client’s primary industry.

Source: RRA Industrial Portfolio Company CEO Placements in North America, 2018 – Oct 2023, n = 66 placements

Step up candidates are becoming more prevalent

59%

of CEOs placed were first-time CEO/set-up candidates

While a “seasoned, successful PE CEO” remains the gold standard, step-up candidates are gaining traction. Our analysis showed that 59% of our recent CEO placements in the space were step-up candidates in the role for the first-time. Many PE firms are embracing first-time CEOs, as these candidates are eager to prove themselves, often more technologically savvy, and typically less expensive. Oftentimes these are second-in-command leaders (COOs and presidents) from the PE world, or P&L leaders from heavily decentralized organizations who have run their businesses with a CEO mindset. These first time CEOs almost have proven success in areas imperative to the investment thesis (e.g., operational turnaround, M&A roll-up experience, commercial transformation).

Prior PE experience is no longer a must-have for industrial portfolio company CEOs

44%

of CEOS had prior senior experience at a PE backed company

While prior private equity experience used to be viewed as a requirement for success, that sentiment has started to shift. Our analysis found that only 44% of these CEOs had prior senior experience in a PE-backed company.  The trade-off between prior PE and public experience is gradually shrinking as a wider range of candidates continue to demonstrate successful transitions into the PE environment.

Looking beyond the CEO – Driving performance across the value chain

Empowering functional and business leadership (particularly early in investment cycles) is critical in delivering investment outperformance. Intensified focus by sponsors on these functional leaders beyond CEOs, and even beneath the C-suite is becoming an imperative. PE has long relied on the CEO role to drive value creation but it is apparent that today’s environments demands additional scrutiny of management team roles, operating models, corporate structure, and company culture. To avoid misalignment, PE firms are placing greater emphasis on functional leadership and teams.

In our analysis of RRA industrial portfolio company placements over the past few years, we’ve seen a marked increase in placements focused on three key functional areas for industrial portfolio company leadership:

Go-to-market (chief commercial officer, chief   marketing officer, chief revenue officer)

Human resources (CHRO)

Operations & supply chain (chief operations officer, chief supply chain officer, chief procurement officer, chief logistics officer)

Growth of key functional roles in industrial portfolio companies

Source: RRA Go-to-Market, Human Resources and Operations & Supply Chain Industrial Portfolio Placements in North America, 2018 – Oct 2023, n = 164 placements

Typically these executives are brought in to upgrade a function core to the portfolio company deal thesis. These are two common archetypes for these functional leadership hires: 1) executives from best-in-class “academy” companies with the depth of applicable sector, customer, or transformation experience that can be easily leveraged into the new role; or 2) proven PE operators who can drive change at pace. Typically, ideal candidates come with both sets of experiences but, as with CEOs, prioritizing critical competencies is key in a tight talent market.

How PE Firms can build a talent advantage in their industrial portfolio companies

Creating a high-performing, cohesive team for an industrial portfolio company is more challenging than ever, but there are proven levers that improve talent management (and, by extension, ROI) across a fund portfolio.

1) Formal ownership of human capital  at the fund level

Many private equity firms have established a senior-level leadership role (chief talent officer, chief people officer) that owns talent strategy across the portfolio. While backgrounds of these executives—and the roles themselves—vary widely across firms, there’s a consistent mandate for these leaders:

Create standardized executive hiring processes

Establish company-specific talent KPIs and

Build a bench and broader advisor network beyond any one individual search.

50% of PE firms with AUM>$2B have a dedicated talent leader, however, these executives are rare in smaller firms.3 This represents an opportunity for smaller firms to differentiate their talent strategy and derive additional value across the deal cycle. And larger funds will continue to mature the directive for their CTOs and CPOs, focusing on data-driven talent insights to drive future decision-making.

2) Alignment & flexibility

Achieving a successful executive hire quickly requires prioritization around the leadership profile. Additionally, PE firms benefit when they are open-minded about an executive’s PE or CEO experience—or lack thereof. In the industrial world, flexibility between sectors is particularly applicable, and we have seen successful candidates move from adjacent spaces (from discrete manufacturing to process manufacturing businesses) or make even broader leaps (from automotive to consumer durables).

3) Define critical competencies upfront

Even when the need for change is clear, PE sponsors often struggle to align on the mission-critical functional and experiential competencies. Furthermore, PE leadership is often comprised of dealmakers who may place a premium on “charismatic” leadership and rapid-fire execution, instead of heavily weighting the value drivers specific to the portfolio company.

Defining the truly critical competencies up front,  (rather than creating a laundry list of “nice-to-haves”) is a key success driver, typically accelerating  C-suite executive placement.

Talent management remains the top strategic priority across the PE landscape. Funds that adapt to today’s talent market can attract and develop top-tier industrial CEOs and establish a top talent pipeline for the future.

Authors

Sarabeth Tukey is a senior leader in Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources practice and Private Equity practice. She is based in New York.

Kannitha Than is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

Sources

Bililies, Ted. “Private Equity Needs a New Talent Strategy.” Harvard Business Review, October 16, 2023. https://hbr.org/2023/11/private-equity-needs-a-new-talent-strategy.

Jules, Claudy, and Jason Phillips. “Chief Performance Officers Can Be a Secret Ingredient for Private Equity Success. Here’s Why.” McKinsey & Company, November 4, 2022. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/private-equity-and-principal-investors/our-insights/chief-performance-officers-can-be-a-secret-ingredient-for-private-equity-success-heres-why.

Bililies, Ted, Richard Wallace, Clark Perry, Pippa Ross, and Josh Tecchio. “Eighth Annual PE Leadership Survey.” AlixPartners. Accessed November 28, 2023. https://features.alixpartners.com/private-equity-leadership-survey-2023/#section-About-the-Survey-5AMwqFjEuU.

The Leadership Tapestry of Industrial Portfolio Companies

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices