CMO Success Blueprint: Timing, Talent, and Retention in Early-Stage Biotech | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CMO Success Blueprint: Timing, Talent, and Retention in Early-Stage Biotech

Leadership StrategiesHealthcareVenture Capital and GrowthInnovation, Research, and DevelopmentExecutive Search

Article

November 01, 2023

10 min

Leadership StrategiesHealthcareVenture Capital and GrowthInnovation, Research, and DevelopmentExecutive Search

Executive Summary

When are early-stage biotechnology organizations hiring their CMOs? Our research uncovers the importance of considering time to clinic.

Close

Elizabeth “Bizzy” Balaraman

San Francisco

Yvonne Lu

San Francisco
Boston

Hayden Melecio

New York

The global biotechnology market, amidst uncertainty, has continued to grow through new investments. This upward trajectory is expected to persist, with industry experts forecasting a growth valuation of $1.2 trillion in 2022 to over $3.2 trillion by 2030.1 In this highly competitive and rapidly evolving landscape, having the right leadership in place is critical for staying ahead of the curve.

Of the executive roles needed for an organization’s success, the Chief Medical Officer (CMO) is a critical hire to accelerate a company’s growth. To better understand this high-in-demand role and marketplace, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed 30+ select biotech organizations that have evolved from pre-clinical to clinical-stage and, in some cases, private to public.  We also conducted interviews with nearly a dozen experienced clinical experts in the market that have held CMO or Head of Development roles at early-stage companies.

We learned that a recruitment and retention strategy depends heavily on a company’s timeline to clinic with their first investigational new drug (IND) filing. Hiring a CMO too early can pose challenges in attracting and retaining top talent.  To navigate this, early-stage biotechnology organizations should:

Bring in an earlier stage clinical leader, such as a Head of Early Clinical Development or a Chief Development Officer, as they pursue early-stage pre-clinical work

Supplement gaps in their clinical team with external hires, such as consultants or next generation leaders (e.g., Vice President of Clinical Development) who can provide clinical input on initial discussions

Invest in their CMO or VP/SVP of Clinical Development’s leadership and management abilities to ensure retention and success

Consider their pipeline when looking to hire their next CMO, particularly investigational new drug (IND) filings

As leaders navigate the R&D talent landscape and consider their own team’s expansion, we hope that these insights and key questions will help leadership teams plan their recruitment and retention strategy appropriately.

The current Chief Medical Officer landscape

Two-thirds of current Chief Medical Officers are in the role for the first time, with only 34% demonstrating previous CMO experience. Additionally, 86% bring experience in pre-clinical research and/or early development. A majority of Chief Medical Officers come from either large pharma or biotech (Figure 1) as opposed to straight from academia.

While CMOs bring a diverse set of experiences, demographics are fairly homogenous: only 24% of these executives identify as women, highlighting an opportunity to diversify R&D leadership.

The 2023 early-stage biotechnology Chief Medical Officer landscape

Early-stage biotechnology organizations must consider their timeline to clinic when hiring a CMO

Via our analysis, we identified that the timing of the Chief Medical Officer hire relative to their first IND filing is crucial to retention. CMOs are likely to be hired pre-IND filing, but less likely to stay when hired too far out from key IND filing activities. (Figure 2).

We found that although 82% of CMOs were hired before the organization’s IND filing, about 40% of these leaders departed before reaching this crucial inflection point, with nearly half of them leaving within a year or less. Notably, around 89% of these departures occurred more than two years before the company’s filing.

Figure 2: Early-stage biotechnology Chief Medical Officer tenure in relation to IND filing

Among the 60% who remained through IND filing, 62% were hired within one year before the company’s filing and have a high average tenure at 2.5 years. This suggests a critical consideration for retention when determining the optimal timing for hiring the first Chief Medical Officer: if aiming for a preclinical-phase hire, the ideal timing largely depends on your product’s IND filing readiness.

The rationale behind pre-IND filing hiring often revolves around the need to have a clinical leader capable of overseeing preclinical and translational operations, document preparation and trial design. While ideal, retaining a leader hired during the preclinical phase throughout the IND filing process is not necessarily straightforward and always subject to inherent risks that come with early-stage drug development. Few clinical leaders are willing to commit more than a year to preclinical work, resulting in the loss of valuable institutional knowledge, from drug inception to trials, which is vital during a company’s growth and development. A quick way to mitigate this is by hiring an earlier stage clinical leader, such as a VP or SVP of Clinical Development or Translational Medicine.

A less common – but more retention-optimal method – is hiring the first CMO after the organization’s first IND filing. For CMOs brought on after the company’s first IND filing, we found that 80% were hired at least a year after the initial IND filing and have the highest average tenure of ~3 years. Similarly, retention remains high for those hired 1-2 years after the initial IND filing, with an average of ~2.8 years. This timeline ensures that a leader is brought in when their expertise is most needed, particularly during the clinical stages, and more likely to be retained within the organization. As these CMOs navigate clinical obstacles, their reasons for leaving may look vastly different than those who depart prior to IND filing—likely driven by clinical failures versus seeking personal development.

These findings emphasize the importance of recruiting CMOs at the right time; one which is aligned across the organization's developmental stage, IND filing milestones, and financing strategy.

Learnings from experts who have successfully incorporated medical officers into their businesses

Via interviews with leading experts, we identified three key recommendations for hiring and retaining your next CMO:

1. Bring in an earlier stage clinical leader

Depending on the organization, a Chief Medical Officer role is not always necessary. Leading experts noted that non-MD leaders may be just as (if not more) important as companies pursue early-stage development work. This could be a Chief Development Officer, a Head of Early Development, or even a PhD in the field.

“Instead of hiring a CMO pre-IND, a Chief Development Officer could be the next best alternative. This would be someone that knows IND, likely has a PhD, and would act as a senior leader within the executive team.” – 2x Chief Development Officer

2. Bridge the gap to IND filing with external experts

Engaging external experts (like consultants or scientific advisory boards) at least two years before IND filing may be just as beneficial and cost-effective to an organization as engaging a CMO. This external leader would help with clinical input and initial discussions around developmental prioritization. Once this expert lays the foundation of the organization’s clinical agenda, a Chief Medical Officer can be hired – this would not only tackle the issues around retention and timelines, but also serve as opportunity for the company to prioritize cost-effective measures in the early-stages.

“If INDs are coming through over a period of several years, have a consultant help with clinical input and review the pipeline to help initial discussion around prioritization. Once that’s done, you can bring in a full-time CMO.” – 3x Chief Medical Officer

“I believe 2 years from the clinic is a bit early, especially if there has been no clinical candidate nominated or no imminent IND. I would recommend bringing in a clinical person part-time. What’s more important is having a sound CSO to make sure preclinical work is being done to support the first IND.” – 4x President of R&D

To mitigate this, we suggest conducting a careful assessment of the capabilities of your existing C-suite leadership, benchmark them against market standards, and fill the gaps with external experts.

3. Invest in your clinical leader’s development

As shown above, CMO retention remains a pressing issue for early-stage biotechnology organizations. These experts echoed that CMO retention is highly dependent on the quick progression of an organization’s clinical pipeline. Providing opportunities for your CMO to be involved in broader strategic activities is crucial. Many of these leaders are seeking these strategic involvements and responsibilities as they enter a new organization.

“Problem of bringing someone on early – there’s just not as much for that person to do other than participate in discussions. You may end up without a drug until 12-24 months after hire, so there’s a big risk that you never even have an asset that an MD can work on.” – 3x Chief Medical Officer

To mitigate this, we suggest utilizing executive assessments to gain in-depth insights into how your executive team leads, including their potential impact, strengths, opportunities for growth, team effectiveness, and areas of improvement.

Planning for the biotech organization of the future

As early-stage biotech organizations continue maturing their pipeline and R&D strategy, executive leaders need to be equipped with the proper understanding of hiring timelines to guarantee successful drug discovery and development. And with the biotech industry’s current turbulence, equipping your organization with the right people at the right time is critical, both from a financial and growth standpoint.

To ensure future success, early-stage biotechnology executive teams must address the following questions:

Timeline to Clinic: Where does your organization currently stand on its clinical development timeline?

MD vs. Non-MD Leadership: How would the inclusion of a medical doctor (MD) impact your progress compared to hiring a leader without an MD background?

Board or Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) vs. CMO: Would your organization derive greater benefit from having an MD on its board or scientific advisory board, as opposed to appointing a Chief Medical Officer?

Financing and runway: What is your organization’s financing strategy and cash runway? Is a CMO hire required for your next round of fundraising?

These actions, informed by a comprehensive understanding of your organization's unique needs and market dynamics, serve as a roadmap for strengthening your executive leadership team and will ensure your early-stage biotechnology organization’s continued success.

Methodology

We examined the historical Chief Medical Officer (CMO) hiring timelines across thirty early-stage biotech organizations – collecting data on their first CMO hire and their sitting CMO. Data collected includes: date of hire, career backgrounds, educational backgrounds, and general demographics. Data was also collected on each organization regarding their pipelines – IND filing dates, phase of clinical development at time of hire, among others.

Supplementing this data, we conducted several interviews with various market experts to gather further qualitative understanding on CMO hiring, retention, and success.

Authors

Bizzy Balaraman is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Biopharma practice. She is based in San Francisco.
Yvonne Lu co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Biopharma practice. She is based in San Francisco.
Hayden Melecio is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Biopharma Practice. He is based in New York.
Tiffany Yam is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare Knowledge team. She is based in San Francisco.

Sources

1 Precedence Research. July 2023. Biotechnology Market (By Application: Bio-pharmacy, Bio-industries, Bio-services, Bio-agriculture, and Bio-informatics; By Technology: Fermentation, Tissue Engineering and Regeneration, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Technology, Nanobiotechnology, Chromatography, Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) Sequencing, and Cell Based Assay) - Global Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends, Regional Outlook, and Forecast 2023 – 2030. https://www.precedenceresearch.com/biotechnology-market
2 Biotechnology Innovation Organization. February 2021. Clinical Development Success Rates and Contributing Factors 2011–2020. https://go.bio.org/rs/490-EHZ-999/images/ClinicalDevelopmentSuccessRates2011_2020.pdf

CMO Success Blueprint: Timing, Talent, and Retention in Early-Stage Biotech

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices