Planning for the Expected: CEO Succession in Financial Services | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Planning for the Expected: CEO Succession in Financial Services

Career TransitionsIndustry TrendsLeadership StrategiesFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementInvestment ManagementFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 1 author

June 03, 2024

4 min

Career TransitionsIndustry TrendsLeadership StrategiesFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementInvestment ManagementFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

CEO succession will be one of the most defining challenges for financial institutions.

Close

James Diggines

Singapore

Sean Dineen

Boston

Mary-Caroline Tillman

New York

Beijing Zhu

Hong Kong

The past few years have marked a watershed moment for CEO successions across the global financial services sector.

Our analysis of CEO turnover data highlights a telling trend: from 2018 to 2023, there were 222 CEO changes at publicly traded financial services (FS) firms globally. Moreover, 71% of these leadership transitions were either unplanned or abrupt, driven by removals, departures to pursue other opportunities, or retirements lacking any prior succession planning. This is in sharp contrast to the mere 7% of departures that were managed through a planned long-term succession process (see Figure 1).

This data not only underscores the volatility and unpredictability in turnover at the CEO level, but also signals an urgent need for a more strategic approach to succession planning—a theme that is increasingly becoming a focal point in our engagements with clients across the financial services sector.

Figure 1. FS CEO Departures, by type* | 2018-2023

Source: RRA proprietary analysis, FS CEO turnover, 2018-2023, n=222

*Classification of reasons for CEO departures is derived from a comprehensive review of publicly available information, including news publications, official announcements, and relevant articles around the time of each CEO's departure announcement. This categorization is intended to provide insight into overarching trends and should be interpreted within the context of the best available information at the time of the analysis.

**In certain instances, removals or departures for personal reasons or other opportunities could be a scenario accounted for within succession plans.

Succession surge: the intensifying need for proactive CEO succession

Looking ahead, the landscape of CEO turnover in financial services is poised to escalate further. Through our dialogues with clients, we are seeing an escalating focus on succession planning, underpinned by multiple indicators suggesting this will only increase in the years to come:

Limited supply of CEO-ready leaders

Since the global financial crisis, growing regulatory requirements around technical capabilities have created a generation of financial services executives with singular expertise in certain areas, rather than well-rounded leaders who are ready to become CEOs.

Complexity of the CEO role

The CEO role is now more complex than ever, especially against the backdrop of geopolitical transition, competitive complexity, technological disruption, proliferation of stakeholders, and mounting volatility. The growing realization that the CEO of the future will be radically different from the CEO of the past will place succession planning firmly on the boardroom agenda.

Increased public and regulatory scrutiny

The role of a CEO now comes with heightened public scrutiny—whether that’s over issues like compensation, ethical conduct, political stances, etc. One move can dramatically make (or derail) a career, resulting in less stability in the role. Additionally, regulatory oversight concerning governance, particularly the board’s fiduciary responsibilities, is intensifying the focus on long-term succession planning. Regulatory bodies and exchanges have established guidelines mandating a clear policy on CEO succession. For example, the New York Stock Exchange formally stipulates that “succession planning should include policies and principles for CEO selection and performance review, as well as policies regarding succession in the event of an emergency or the retirement of the CEO.” The UK’s Prudential Regulation Authority states that “firms should ensure there are appropriate succession plans in place across the Board and Executive to maintain strong governance, risk management and controls in the event there are changes in personnel.”

Trends in CEO appointments and tenures

2018 marked a peak in new CEO appointments in financial services. Combined with the fact that historically, most FS CEOs have a tenure of between five to eight years, we could see a spike in departures in the next five years (see Figures 2 and 3). Furthermore, 75% of FS CEO appointments over the last five years have been internal, with this percentage rising to over 80% in the last two years, further highlighting the importance of internal successor development (see Figure 4).

Demographic shifts

Aging populations, particularly in developed economies, are poised to create a 'retirement cliff’ that could precipitate a significant number of leadership transitions. In Japan, for instance, research shows more than one in four people are at or above retirement age.

It is increasingly clear that CEO succession will be the one of the most defining challenges for financial institutions in the coming decade. Many leading financial institutions, from blue-chip names to smaller family-led institutions, are publicly announcing – or at least signalizing their commitment to – putting in place robust succession plans. This strategic foresight is crucial not just for the stability of these institutions but also for their continued relevance and success in a rapidly evolving financial landscape.

Figure 2. Number of new FS CEO appointments, by year

2018-2023

Figure 3. Average tenure of departing FS CEOs, by %

2018-2023

Figure 4. # of new FS CEO appointments, by % internal candidates | 2018-2023

Source: RRA proprietary analysis, FS CEO turnover, 2018-2023, n=222

A vastly underprepared industry

Despite the fact that CEO succession might very well be the most important decision financial institutions can make, according our Global Leadership Monitor, the financial services industry is vastly underprepared. Most are not adequately prioritizing succession, starting the process too late, and are unclear around best-practices. In fact, for many, it is still treated like a one-off event triggered by an abrupt departure.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor 2023, n=64 FS CHROs and Board Directors / n=136 FS executives

The makings of an effective CEO succession process

Over our decades of experience helping clients navigate what is undoubtedly one of the most complex and high-risk decisions their organizations will ever undertake, we have distilled several key learnings and best practices:

Plan thoughtfully

Establish clear timeframes, roles, and responsibilities. Develop a set of tailored criteria that match your current and future needs and devise a thorough interview and screening process to assess against that criteria. Continuously monitor and improve. Have an emergency plan.

Run a dual track

Internal candidates are the backbone of succession planning and need to be managed carefully. However, don’t rule out external candidates. While internals are stronger in terms of specialized industry knowledge and culture fit, externals can offer different skill sets and a fresh perspective.

Focus on development

Development in the long-term succession context is specific to the unique requirements of the CEO role, which needs to consider the ecosystem in which the CEO will operate. Coaching is not enough.

Start early

It’s never too early to start planning for your next CEO. It’s not just about finding a single leader – it’s about setting up guidelines, processes, search, training, mentorship and monitoring that will provide you with a sustainable talent pipeline for years to come.

Be considerate of the incumbent

When it comes to deciding on the ideal profile for the next CEO, in talking about the ‘wish list’ or desire for ‘the future,’ one can inadvertently appear to be dissatisfied with what you have. Real care should be taken to avoid misinterpretation and alienating the incumbent CEO.

Align stakeholders

The best succession plans are ones where boards, sitting CEOs, and CHROs can come together to plan, measure, and mentor future leadership candidates. A robust and constant feedback loop is required to ensure everyone feels included, and there needs to be trust from all parties.

Craft a forward-looking role profile

The CEO of the future will be different from the CEO of the past. Taking time upfront to craft a forward-looking success profile that considers the required leadership characteristics for the future – as well as the related trade offs – will be key.

Enhance retention

There can only be one successful CEO candidate. Build parallel development paths for those not chosen so that they still feel supported and appreciated. Even if they’re not ready for immediate succession, they may still be strong candidates for future succession cycles.

Manage transition carefully

Succession does not end with the announcement and appointment of the new CEO. Begin transition planning months in advance of the CEO’s official start date and continue the process well into the first phase of the new CEO’s tenure. This will ensure he or she is set up for success.

Integrate CEO and C-Suite Succession

CEO succession cannot be conducted in isolation from the broader C-Suite. Organizations need to build a broad talent bench for a range of CEO-feeder roles. Keep in mind that CEO and C-Suite succession goes hand in hand and is a complex 3D chess game.

A complex interplay between the board, the incumbent, and the CHRO

Boards, incumbent CEOs, and CHROs each play a unique but important role in the CEO succession process. For each group, start by asking:

The Board and NomCo:

De-risking succession is the ultimate litmus test for boards

Is there a clear timeline for CEO succession?

What are the different scenarios under which a CEO succession could happen, and do you have a plan for each?

Has the board already aligned upon a CEO role profile that considers leadership qualities
and competencies needed to make the organization successful in the future?

Have you established an objective assessment framework by which to evaluate candidates and are you developing your talent towards said framework?

The Sitting CEO:

Succession is your legacy

What is your vision for your organization for the next 5-10 years? What’s the strategy to
achieve that vision?

Do you have the right structures in place to help you get to that vision? Do you have the right ExCo / leadership team in place? If not, where are the gaps / what’s missing?

How do you feel about the strength of your current succession talent bench?

As you think about your own succession, what is the legacy you would like to leave behind from your tenure, and through your exit?

The CHRO:

A high-stakes, high visibility, balancing act

When it comes to CEO succession, how can you establish your influence and impact with the board and have a meaningful seat at the table?

How deeply interactive has your firm’s CEO succession been so far? How engaged are the various stakeholders? How linked is the process to the overall organizational strategy?

Is there a clear division of roles, responsibilities, and ownership when it comes to CEO succession?

Have internal candidates already been identified and / or assessed? Is there a near-, mid- and long-term development plan in place for each internal candidate?

Have your internal candidates been benchmarked against the external market, and do you have a clear picture of “what good looks like”?

Planning for the future via CEO succession

Due to the current tenure of CEOs, most sitting CHROs and many boards have never orchestrated a CEO succession process before. At this unique point in time, CEO succession is a high impact undertaking fraught with landmines, with significant impact on shareholder value, company image and brand, employee morale, board effectiveness, and the CEO’s own legacy. It’s a high-stakes process that is further complicated by strict qualification and regulatory requirements, which further limits the viable candidate pool.

One doesn’t need to look too far for cautionary tales of CEO succession gone wrong: a top successor candidate pulling out of the process and leaving the company scrambling last minute, an incumbent CEO unwilling to pass on the baton, a PR or health crisis that triggers an emergency replacement…this is not just fodder for TV dramas, but situations we encounter often when partnering with clients on their CEO succession journeys. Building out a thoughtful structure around succession, with a clear plan and an aligned internal and external team, could go a long way in ensuring accretive value creation instead of disruption.

Authors

Nicholas Anderson is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in Hong Kong.

James Diggines leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ global Financial Services Practice. He is based in Singapore.

Sean Dineen is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in Boston.

Tal Friedler is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services knowledge team. She is based in London.

Alexander Hiller is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in London.

Mary-Caroline Tillman is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ global Financial Services Practice. She is based in New York.

Cem Turan leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services knowledge team. He is
based in London.

Beijing Zhu is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. She is based in Hong Kong.

Planning for the Expected: CEO Succession in Financial Services

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices