Succeeding in Your First Year as CFO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Succeeding in Your First Year as CFO

Career AdviceFinance OfficersDevelopment and Transition

Article

June 28, 2024

7 min

Career AdviceFinance OfficersDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Navigating new terrain: lessons from finance veterans for thriving in your first year as CFO.

Close

Symon Elliott

London
New York

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Jim Lawson

New York

The world we operate in today is far more volatile and complex than previously — it's hard to plan one week in advance never mind one year, as one former CFO said. Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor found that leaders feel less prepared to address every major external issue we measure compared to six months ago.

While the CFO role often shifts alongside long-term macroeconomic trends, as Howard Averill former CFO of Time Warner said, in the past decade, we’ve seen a fundamental shift in the strategic and operational rigor required to be a CFO, and finance fundamentals have become table stakes.1 With mounting pressure to deliver as a strategic partner, transitioning into the CFO role has become an increasingly difficult task. What’s more, the majority of newly appointed public company CFOs are doing it for the first time.2

To better understand how to succeed in the first year as CFO, Russell Reynolds Associates interviewed eight former CFOs from our cadre of CFO Mentors —renowned best-in-class executives and strategic partners.

As noted by our interviewees, without the proper onboarding and mentorship, first-time CFOs can often face a myriad of common pitfalls, including arriving with preconceived notions about the organization and strategy, being too quick to act, falling back into their previous role, not building the right team for impact and, most often, not showing up as a strategic executive.

Read on as we delve into how to ensure a smooth transition as a first-time CFO, including:

Pre-transition: How to tactically and mentally prepare
First 90-days: Thinking fast and slow
The First Year in Role: From finance fundamentals to strategic executive

Pre-transition: How to tactically and mentally prepare

All best-in-class CFOs we interviewed agreed: that the CFO role starts the day they accept the new role, not the day they are officially appointed.

As new CFOs, their approach to tactically and mentally preparing for the role will differ based on whether they have been promoted internally or hired externally. As an internal candidate, they have the benefit of organizational knowledge and existing relationships; as an external candidate, they must prioritize understanding the company’s strategic direction and operational nuances.

While the ideal timing for the CFO successor to be decided is one year before the transition for internal promotions and three months for external appointments, this often isn’t the case. Given that these processes are never perfect, it’s critical to concentrate on a well-thought-out, high-impact development plan that will ensure that they start on the right foot as CFO. The following three-pronged approach can ensure success from the get-go.

First 90 days: Thinking fast and slow

Most of our interviewees were familiar with the concept of a 90-day plan, and shared two opposing schools of thought on the practice: Create and execute, or be more conservative in their decision-making in the first 90 days.

“If you don’t question the organization’s commitments, then you own them.”

– David Meline
Former CFO, Moderna

The best practice is to create a finance function strategy once the new CFO understands the organization. The specific path CFOs choose—create quickly or wait until they have all the information—depends on their time-to-appointment, the CEO’s strategy, and their familiarity with the organization.

Internal CFO appointments should be able to get off to a quick start, given their existing organizational awareness. Through prior conversations with the CEO, CHRO, other C-suite members, and independent mentors, the priorities and strategy should become clear.

Alternatively, if they have the luxury of time, a slower-paced approach pays off for many first-time CFOs. One interviewee went as far as saying don’t make any transformational decisions in the finance function until they are a year into the role. It takes time to understand the business, industry, stakeholders, and strategy — especially if they are coming from outside the organization.

To ensure the CFO is being viewed as a strategic partner, conducting a listening tour in which they start to build partnerships with colleagues both within and outside the finance function was a staple for our interviewees. Understanding their stakeholders, ensuring that they understand their position as CFO, and discussing their finance team needs are all fundamental to building trust and a collaborative relationship in which the CFO is viewed as a business partner, rather than just the finance expert.

Chris Kreidler, former Sysco CFO, would approach every stakeholder with the same question: “What do you think is—and isn’t—working with the finance team?” The range of answers he received helped him form a point of view on where the finance team stood and his leadership strategy.

The First Year: From finance fundamentals to strategic executive

Whether the CFO develops the strategy for the finance function within 90 days or sometime within the first year, CFOs cited the following as the most important building blocks to have in place within the first year.

The First Year: Three Building Blocks for Success

01

Strategic Alignment

Aligning with the CEO and board on strategic priorities is crucial.

Start with the organizational strategy – in the first few months, their priorities should cement their position as an executive leader. Then, they can turn internally to strategize around the finance function.

02

Functional Priorities

After broader strategic alignment, identify where finance can enable strategy.

A common pitfall is to make decisions for the sake of decisions. Don’t let pride influence actions. Patience is of the utmost importance when operating at the organizational level, and “it takes about 2-3 years to feel the full impact of your strategy”, as George Davis, Former CFO, of Intel put it.

03

The Right Team for Impact

Do they have the right people to achieve their strategy? Do they complement the CFO’s strengths and weaknesses?

Do not make any people decisions for the first 3 months.*

“Don’t make important policy or personnel decisions based on first impressions.”  David Meline, ex-CFO, Moderna

*Judgement is key here, if there are clear misfits on the team, don’t take too long to make these decisions, as a detractor could reflect poorly on the CFO.

Ensure there is understanding of the organization’s broader talent context. For example, if the CFO is new to the organization, they may be managing direct reports who were up for your job. Understanding the situation they’re stepping into is critical in level-setting expectations and retaining top-talent.

While all are important building blocks, Kevin Ozan, former CFO of McDonald's, stressed the importance of being able to pivot. Business changes, performance issues, unexpected crises—you can never predict when these might arise. And when they do, you must respond quickly. This is why it's important to get your talent right and delegate.

Taking flight: No one gets to the top by themselves

As a first-time CFO, the role will be more challenging than anything a first-time CFO has encountered in their career previously. To help mitigate this, CFOs shared the partners who were most critical in their development:

Your CEO –  Getting the CFO/CEO relationship right is crucial. One way to build the relationship quickly and understand the business is to travel with the CEO, having them vouch for the CFO in introductions with the right people can help expedite their onramp time.

An external CFO mentor – While an audit committee chair or board member can be a beneficial thought partner, they likely aren’t someone a CFO can turn to and say, “I haven’t encountered this situation before – Where do I start?” Finding an objective mentor who understands the role and can share lessons learned is an invaluable resource.

Network of peers – It can be lonely at the top. One CFO said, “Truth checks itself at the door of the CFO.” As CFO, it’s important to develop a network of peers who you can trust to be honest with you. This network doesn’t have to consist of just CFOs—in fact, a more diverse group can help accelerate their understanding of their peers at work. Secondly, looking for CFOs who are also going through the same transition can create the opportunity for a sounding board. Both communities can provide a safe space for trading lessons learned.

A creative outlet – Whether it’s a podcast, newsletter, or book, finding something that challenges CFOs to think outside of their role and organization has proven to be a spark in igniting creativity. Bob Shanks, former CFO of Ford Motor Company, reads science fiction like Dune in his spare time. Escaping from the role and using another part of one’s brain allows leaders to think creatively about their organization and strategy.

Contributors

Our insights would not be possible without our esteemed participants' generous time and input.

Howard Averill – Former CFO for Time Warner and current Audit Committee Chair for Campbell Soup
George Davis – Former CFO for Intel and current Board Member at WW Grainger
Jeff Epstein – Audit Committee Chair at Twillio and Okta and former CFO for Oracle
Chris Kreidler  – Former CFO for Sysco and current Board Member at TRUEBLUE and Alyasra Foods
Maria Henry – Former CFO for Kimberly-Clarke and current Board Member at Nextera Energy, Nike and General Mills
David Meline – Former CFO for Moderna and current Board Member at HP, Pacific Biosciences of California and ABB
Kevin Ozan – Former CFO for McDonalds and current Board Member at McKesson, The Hershey Company and Cineworld Group
Bob Shanks – Former CFO for Ford Motor Company and current Audit Committee Chair at Garrett Motion

Authors

Symon Elliot leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global CFO Mentorship Program. He is based in London.
Jenna Fisher co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Palo Alto.
Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. He is based in New York.
Catherine Schroeder leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Toronto.

References

1The Evolving Academy Finance Landscape | Russell Reynolds Associates
2Global CFO Turnover Index | Russell Reynolds Associates

Succeeding in Your First Year as CFO

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices