How to Rebuild Your Hospitality Talent Pipeline | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How to Rebuild Your Hospitality Talent Pipeline

Industry TrendsCulture RiskGrowth and ScalingLeisure and Hospitality

Article

September 05, 2024

5 min

Industry TrendsCulture RiskGrowth and ScalingLeisure and Hospitality

Executive Summary

Talent pipelines within the hospitality industry remain dry. We share six solutions to rebrand hospitality for the future.

Close

The hospitality industry has undergone significant challenges over the last four years, including Covid-induced supply chain issues, inflation, geopolitical concerns, accelerated tech change, changing consumer expectations, shifting workforce demands and shrinking labor pools.

Because of these interlocking factors, there has been a fundamental change in how people view hospitality work, particularly in the US. This is partially due to the changing conversation around higher education—as more and more organizations emphasize the importance of a bachelor's degree, even for entry level roles, the cultural attitude towards working in the hospitality industry has shifted. What was once viewed as a viable long-term career path is now often seen as a temporary stepping stone into one’s full-time career.

68%

of hospitality leaders are open to leaving the industry.

These factors have significantly impacted talent retention at the leadership and employee level. According to our latest Global Leadership Monitor, a significant 70% of hospitality leaders said they would be willing to leave their employer. Even more concerning, 68% agreed that they would be open to making a move beyond hospitality as an industry (Figure 1). This is 17pp higher than the global average and 8pp higher than the broader consumer industry—suggesting that hospitality is at the precipice of a leadership deficit.

Figure 1: Leaders’ likelihood of making a career move – hospitality vs all leaders

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=2,716 global C-suite leaders, and next gen leaders; n=415 Consumer leaders; n=48 L&H leaders

What’s causing this talent shake-up in the hospitality industry?

In a word: culture.

Of course, the actual answer is much more nuanced than one word allows, involving many of the macro factors noted above. Still, when we asked hospitality leaders why they might be willing to change employers, the top response was “a desire to feel more valued by my organization.”

Leaders who don’t feel valued are unlikely to have a positive outlook on their organization’s culture and their personal development opportunities within it. And indeed, hospitality leaders have rather dismal views around organizational culture, with only 40% agreeing that their organization has a culture that effectively retains top talent, only 41% agreeing that the way that top leaders view culture is consistent with how employees view culture, and 47% agreeing that their organization’s culture supports their future strategy (Figure 2).

Whether it’s a reaction to the macro external factors noted above, a response to internal culture and development issues or a combination of both, it’s clear that hospitality organizations need to better understand their cultures to improve retention at the top.

Figure 2: Hospitality leaders views on their organization’s culture

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n= 53 Leisure & Hospitality leaders

Six steps to rebrand hospitality for the future

To address retention concerns and refresh the hospitality talent pool, hotels and other hospitality organizations should consider the following:

Rebrand the hospitality career path

Entry-level hospitality jobs, particularly in the United States, are rarely viewed as part of a longer career path. To address this, hospitality organizations should get involved in high schools, colleges, community programs, etc. so the workforce of the future understands the opportunities within the hospitality industry.

Define and communicate leadership development pathways

Our Monitor shows that, while 86% of hospitality leaders want to take on more responsibility in the next two to three years, only 43% see a clear path to a larger role that would provide said responsibilities. Ensure that development programs are clearly articulated and communicated to everyone in the organization—even your leadership team. Investing in leaders’ development plans via targeted accelerators, mentorship and sponsorship programs, and targeted accelerators will help retain top performers.

Develop succession plans at every level

Build success profiles by level, focusing on the capabilities and behaviors leaders need to deal with in their specific environments, as well as competencies needed to meet the challenges and opportunities faced by the broader industry. Hospitality leaders should also consider potential successors beyond their corporate employees. Determine if there are opportunities for on the ground employees (e.g., on-site managers) to move into corporate roles and help these individuals succeed by creating structure around those development pathways. This will ensure that succession plans extend deep into an organization and can help mitigate potential leadership deficits.

Examine your tone from the top

While culture change requires agreement at every level, meaningful transformation requires ownership from the top. Strong leaders are well equipped to support an evolving culture, but if the tone from existing leaders—especially the CEO—conflicts with organizational mandates and employees’ culture perceptions, even world-class leaders are unlikely to make meaningful progress.

Manage culture as a material asset

The culture you have today is a complex operating system – you can’t expose every hidden truth at once. Explore whether your culture supports your strategic direction and, in doing so, apply the same discipline, resourcing, and focus as you did when setting said direction. Dedicate resources and effort to understanding your situation through focus groups, interviews, and less conventional data sources that might contain tough messages. Consider tapping into recent advancements in culture measurement that evaluate how leaders act and what people believe, utilize unique question formats that check for specific issues, and reveal hard truths about an organization.

Allocate resources and investments towards cultural practices that support wellbeing

Our recent research shows that employees with high wellbeing are significantly more likely to report clarity around their work environment. Ensure that employee wellbeing (or related outcomes like engagement and retention) is incorporated into the objectives of senior leaders and managers, and allocate resources and investments towards cultural practices that support wellbeing at every level.

Authors

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.

Sotiria Pericli is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

Hoda Tahoun leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leisure & Hospitality Practice. She is based in Miami.

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Online Grocery Spiked During COVID-19. What Now?

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsLeadership StrategiesCulture RiskDevelopment and Transition

What Aspiring C-suite Leaders Need to Know About “Being Available”

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices