Post-Private Equity Career Paths For Female Investment Professionals | Russell Reynolds Assoctes

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Post-Private Equity Career Paths For Female Investment Professionals

InclusionPrivate CapitalInvestment ManagementInclusion and Culture

Article

October 16, 2023

3 min

InclusionPrivate CapitalInvestment ManagementInclusion and Culture

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Many female investment professionals are leaving private equity careers after only a few years. Where are they heading?

Close

Nadine Mensdorf

Frankfurt

Daniela Nienstedt

Frankfurt

In recent years, we have witnessed a significant increase in female professionals starting careers as private equity investment professionals. However, many have left the private equity industry after only a few years. This article explores why female investment professionals leave private equity careers, and the industries and roles they transition into.

Why female professionals leave private equity

There are several reasons why female professionals leave the private equity industry. Our analyses yielded five main factors:

Intense working hours: Private equity demands a relentless dedication to the job, with long working hours being the norm. For many female professionals, this work schedule often clashes with their desire for work-life balance.

Incompatibility with family life: Balancing the demands of a thriving private equity career with the responsibilities of family life presents a considerable challenge for female professionals.

Poor corporate culture: A challenging or even toxic corporate culture can be a significant deterrent for talented female professionals in private equity. Instances of gender bias, discrimination, and lack of support can create a hostile environment that hinders professional growth and diminishes job satisfaction. The absence of inclusive policies and mentorship opportunities further contribute to the erosion of female talent in the industry.

Lack of proximity to portfolio companies: Investment professionals expect challenging, hands-on, and dynamic work with portfolio companies. Regrettably, the demands of day-to-day business operations and fund strategy hinder their ability to establish the desired proximity to portfolio companies. The lack of entrepreneurial latitude inhibits the development opportunities that many female investment professionals wish for.

Diverging interests: As female professionals continue to explore diverse career paths, it becomes evident that private equity does not always align with their professional aspirations. Some female professionals are drawn to industries that offer a greater sense of purpose.

Where female professionals head after private equity

While paths out of the private equity industry can be manifold, female professionals often transition into one of the following five groups:

Group 1 – Banking, consulting, and the big 4

Transitioning into banking, consulting, or one of the big 4 accounting firms is common for female professionals after private equity (see Figure 1). The analytical and financial nature of these industries aligns well with the skills needed and developed in private equity. Additionally, consulting and the big 4 accounting firms have more advanced policies and frameworks around an inclusive work place, resulting in more flexible working hours, extended parental leave opportunities, and more.

Group 2 – Smaller firms or portfolio companies

Female professionals who want to stay close to the private equity industry and appreciate the nature of the work opt to join smaller firms (e.g., mid-cap  or small-cap) or other investment vehicles that offer a more flexible and inclusive culture. Alternatively, some female professionals join the management teams at portfolio companies, where they can continue to have a highly demanding role, but with more flexibility.

Group 3 – Corporate environment

A considerable number of female professionals join corporate environments as business development, finance, controlling, or operational professionals. Corporate settings often offer a more work-life balance and well-defined parental leave policies.

Group 4 – Self-employed advisory and consulting

For some female professionals, the allure of self-employment is strong. They seek autonomy and independence in their careers, which may not be fully achievable within the sometimes hierarchical structures of private equity firms. As self-employed advisors or singular investors, these female professionals can tailor their work to their preferences.

Group 5 – Educational pursuits, sabbaticals, and radical career changes

A small percentage of female professionals temporarily leave the private equity industry to pursue further education or take a sabbatical for personal development. Some undertake radical career changes apart from finance (e.g., engineering, physics, computer science, medicine) and pursue a career that aligns with their educational trajectory (e.g., medical doctor, researcher).

Conclusion

Female professionals primarily leave the private equity industry because of the environment, as well as the work content. Regarding the environment, private equity firms can take tangible actions to address the long and unpredictable working hours, incompatibility of a private equity career with family life, and poor corporate culture. Doing so should be taken seriously to keep female professionals on board.

Authors

Nadine Mensdorf, leads executive searches for private equity funds, she is based in Frankfurt.
Daniela Nienstedt, heads the Financial Services Sector in Germany, she is based in Frankfurt.
Hannah Klapheck, supports executive searches for private equity funds as a researcher, she is based in Frankfurt.

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices