Chapter 2: Forgetting to create sufficient optionality when determining the talent universe | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Chapter 2: Forgetting to create sufficient optionality when determining the talent universe

While boards naturally devote energy to defining and aligning on what is needed in the next CEO—the demand side of the equation—it is also important for boards to ensure they have a strong understanding of the talent market—the supply side—to set selective, yet realistic, expectations.

When boards unwittingly lock onto a single candidate or a type of profile before the process has even begun, it can negatively affect the succession process. Cognitive dissonance then kicks in, and it becomes difficult for decision-makers to change their perspective in light of new information.

Trap 1: Having a skewed perception of internal candidates

Boards are often at risk of developing skewed perceptions of internal candidates, either due to gatekeeping from the incumbent CEO or CHRO, or as a result of pigeon-holed interactions.

Gatekeeping can be both to the candidates’ benefit or their detriment. In one instance, the incumbent CEO or CHRO could be enthusiastic about the process, consciously creating opportunities for internal candidates to grow, but unintentionally presenting them to the board with a positive bias. When the board meets these chosen successors, it becomes obvious that, in reality, they are not yet equipped for the role. On the flip side, the incumbent CEO might stay in their seat longer to actualize their organizational vision, by extension, derailing internal development conversations.

Internal candidates are also more likely to be pigeonholed in their day-to-day responsibilities, such as routine updates on a function or business line, which makes it difficult to properly present their enterprise vision for the organization to the board. The board then develops a narrow view of the individual as a functional leader, which can cause them to undervalue these candidates’ full capabilities and potential, and struggle to see them as CEO material.

On the other hand, because internal candidates are more knowable quantities, hold institutional knowledge, and may also have internal power brokers advocating for them, boards can also incorrectly overvalue internal candidates.

Trap 2: Making assumptions about the external talent landscape

Having a data-driven understanding of how to measure success can help boards better calibrate their view of internal talent. Our Global Leadership Monitor survey found that 47% of board directors and CHROs who have been involved in a CEO transition in the past three years did not engage in external benchmarking.

Our survey of board directors and CHROs found that 47% of CEO transitions in the last three years did not engage in external benchmarking.

In a world experiencing uncertainty and high fluctuation, boards that do not cast a wide net risk selecting only from their known networks, and may miss out on candidates who bring diversified perspectives or thought leadership in nuanced fields (such as disruptive technology, political risk, or the climate challenge).

Boards that only run internal succession processes are at risk of not only limiting their options, but also doing their internal talent a disservice. When internal candidates are developed in a vacuum—not measured against current talent trends, cross-industry dynamics, or functional peers—organizations may fail to identify and craft the interventions needed to best develop their internal succession options.

Trap 3: Overvaluing the job proposition

Talent markets are not unidirectional; they are matching markets, which means that both the organization and potential candidates are simultaneously offering and acquiring something of value. While it’s critical that boards create a very clear definition of what they want to acquire (e.g., certain skills, experience), this should be calibrated to the reality of how the corresponding offer will be perceived by candidates, both internally and externally.

Organizations may have an established and capable pipeline of internal candidates, some of whom are uninterested in becoming CEOs due to personal reasons or different career aspirations. To avoid this, boards should also consider internal candidates’ personal priorities and motivations as they build out the internal pipeline.

More likely, boards will experience this value imbalance in the external marketplace. Part of the endowment effect speaks to the psychological dynamics in which people tend to overvalue items that they are already associated with or in possession of, compared to items that they have no ties to. When this occurs, boards may fail to critically appraise organizational reputation, strategic direction, or senior leadership team culture and values, leading them to expect a higher volume or a higher caliber of interested external candidates.

How can boards overcome these CEO succession decision-making complexities?

Ensure broader board exposure for internal candidates.
Equalize the playing field for internal candidates and present them to the board in the same way as external candidates. Ensure that internal candidates have the opportunity to build their own relationships with the board and engage in meaningful interactions, outside of the dynamics of their day job. This will allow the board to confirm or push back on the incumbent CEO or CHRO’s perspective of development progress, and form an independent view on the quality of the internal pipeline.

Broaden understanding of the talent landscape.
Engaging in strategic sourcing and board recruitment, as needed, will allow the board to stay connected to emerging talent trends. Particularly in the face of uncertainty, boards can create a culture of continuous learning and adaptability by reviewing benchmarking studies, networking with cross-industry leaders, or connecting with academic institutions and experts.

Access external perspectives on organizational reputation and the market.
Board directors should leverage their networks and have conversations that will help them understand how the market perceives their organization’s CEO role, prospective candidates' desires, passions, and motivations, and what potential alternatives are available for candidates in the marketplace. This allows stakeholders to set the right expectations around internal candidate investment, as well as which external candidate archetypes are reasonable to target.

« Previous Chapter

Next Chapter »

Explore more chapters

Chapter 1: Underestimating strategic alignment efforts when defining success factors

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting strategic alignment and how to overcome them

Chapter 3: Distorting the leadership evaluation when assessing candidates

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting leadership evaluation and how to overcome them

Chapter 4: Failing to consider the ripple effects of the CEO selection decision

Learn more about the psychological traps when boards fail to appreciate CEO succession consequences and how to overcome them

Methodology

Data sourced from Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, which surveyed 500 CEOs, board directors, and CHROs on the state of CEO succession and stakeholder perspectives, and interviews with 14 of our Board and CEO Advisory Partners consultants.

Authors

Joy Tan and Tom Handcock of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

Learn more about the authors and The Center for Leadership Insight

Justus O’Brien is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in New York.
Dean Stamoulis is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in Atlanta.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank contributors from Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners who participated for their time and their valuable perspective:

Gretchen Anderson

Sarah Eames

Dee Fitzgerald

David Lange

Stephen Langton

Margot McShane

Luke Meynell

Rusty O’Kelley

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Jennifer Rockwood

Charles Tribbett III

Ty Wiggins

Anita Wingrove

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Start your CEO Succession story

Speak to a Consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices