Unusual Suspects: Microsoft’s Brad Smith on making the rare leap from GC to President | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Unusual Suspects: Microsoft’s Brad Smith on Making the Rare Leap from GC to President

By: Clarke Murphy and Jennifer O’Connell

This research is part of the research conducted under Unusual Suspects pillar of Leadership Labs.

In 2015, Brad Smith joined an exclusive club, becoming one of only a few General Counsels to be appointed as President of a multi-billion-dollar company. We look at how his legal background is helping Microsoft navigate a world that’s spinning faster than ever before.

In the complicated world of corporate leadership, the journey from General Counsel (GC) to CEO has often remained elusive. Our research shows that just 5% of GCs believe their role offers a clear path to becoming CEO. It’s perhaps one reason why so few even aspire to take the helm: Less than 5% of GCs told us that they hoped to become CEO, compared to 62% of Chief Operating Officers.

Yet, as those who have made the leap demonstrate, a GC background brings significant benefits—particularly as the world begins to spin faster than ever before and business issues become increasingly tangled. One pioneer in this space is Brad Smith, a former GC and Microsoft’s President and Vice Chair.

Every year I've had a different job… and if there's a thread that runs throughout the 30 years… it has been trying to help Microsoft and others, including our customers, navigate through this ever-changing landscape.”

I am happy I have a law degree, and there are days when I actually use it. But mostly I'm dealing with a much broader swath of questions. That continual broadening of different intellectual disciplines and functions…defines the role I play at Microsoft today, but also what is needed in the world of business… [as we try] to deal with the complexity of the world in which we live.”

Brad Smith
Former GC and Microsoft’s President and Vice Chair

Brad began his in-house career with Microsoft in 1993, having previously been a partner at the law firm of Covington and Burling (where he is reportedly still remembered as one of the firm’s first attorneys to insist on having a personal computer on his desk).

He first headed up the tech giant’s European legal and corporate affairs team, taking successively more senior roles before being named GC in 2002. In a rare move, he was made President in 2015—a title that had not existed at Microsoft for over a decade.

Today, Brad leads a team of 2,000 business, legal, and corporate affairs professionals across 54 countries, spearheading the company’s work (and representing it publicly) on some of the most pressing questions facing the tech sector today, including AI, cybersecurity, privacy, competition, sustainability, and even immigration. It’s on these particular issues that Brad’s legal background continues to pay dividends.

A changing paradigm

Traditionally, GCs have been perceived as the guardians of compliance, risk mitigation, and legal strategy—capabilities that have not always been prized as highly as traditional CEO skill sets around operational and strategic excellence.

Yet as the corporate landscape and CEO role evolves, perspectives around GCs’ suitability for the top job are shifting. Increasingly, organizations and their boards recognize the unique strengths that GCs can bring to the table.

Jennifer O’Connell, who helps global organizations identify and assess GCs, puts it well when she says that GCs have “very honed muscles” when it comes to navigating complexity and mitigating appropriately against risk. She also describes GCs as the “conscience of the company,” combining commercial instincts with a strong moral compass. “These characteristics are being given more weight than ever before and will increasingly help set GCs apart from their ExCo peers,” she says.

The GC Difference

Harnessing RRA’s executive assessment psychometric data, we found GCs typically possess four important traits.

Pragmatic Problem Solvers

GCs excel at tackling problems in an organized and methodical way, combining established frameworks with their field experience. They understand the importance of presenting information clearly and impactfully.

Meticulous Business Advisor

GCs value professionalism and predictability in their work. They demonstrate a more disciplined work style, enabling them to effectively manage risk. They also have a strong moral compass and use this to appropriately guide decision-making.

Measured Communicator

GCs tend to value discretion and, as such, are often viewed as a consigliere to the C-suite and board. They are straightforward communicators and are typically non-political. They remain calm under pressure, and their quiet confidence inspires credibility in the eyes of others.

Versatile Contributor

GCs tend to be more cooperative and collaborative, while also being more comfortable sharing leadership responsibilities and the limelight. They are more likely to seek input from other team members and are more averse to office politics.

Brad demonstrated many of these strengths when he negotiated a historic anti-trust settlement with the US Department of Justice—a high-profile case that led to a media frenzy and ultimately Microsoft changing its business practices. Since that trial, Brad has continued to spearhead the industry to assume more responsibility and has called for governments to move faster to address the challenges that new technologies create.

A decade ago in Silicon Valley, people stood up and proudly said, ‘We believe in moving fast and breaking things,’ and then eventually, the rest of the world said, ‘You know, I think you all are breaking more than you should,’"

The industry has gone through a shift, I would argue is still going through a shift, in having to accept the responsibility that is being foisted quite rightly upon it. And the interesting thing about Microsoft is we had to go through that before others. We're not necessarily, and we never necessarily were, the smartest kid in the class, but we had to enroll in this school before others did.”

Brad Smith
Former GC and Microsoft’s President and Vice Chair

Today, these same characteristics will undoubtedly help Brad deliver on Microsoft’s promise to be carbon negative by 2030—something he describes as a “moonshot,” given the rise of Gen-AI, an energy-intensive technology that is now being adopted at a scale unimaginable when Microsoft made its climate pledge in 2020.

Brad remains committed to the goal, not least because it is the right thing to do—and is confident about finding a way through the complexity, whether that’s purchasing semiconductor chips that run on carbon-free energy or building data centers out of greener steel or concrete.

True to his background, Brad believes that it will be regulations and accounting principles that will drive the most change, including the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive, which not only applies to companies headquartered in Europe but also global organizations that have a presence there—either in terms of employees or revenue.

Watch what happens in Brussels. Watch the rules…We're all going to have to snap to that.”

Inspecting trees, analyzing forests

While the potential advantages of elevating GCs into senior business leadership roles are clear, challenges persist. GCs may run into preconceived notions about their suitability for the role—and have to work harder to win over hearts and minds—at least at the start of their transition.

For example, our research shows that one of the biggest differences between CEOs and GCs is their risk appetite—with CEOs typically more adventurous than GCs who prefer adherence to rules.

There may also be extra legwork to broaden their skill set and proficiency in areas such as finance, operations, and marketing, to meet the diverse demands of the senior leadership positions that they will now oversee as CEO.

Ultimately, however, leadership is about thriving in complexity, whether it’s through partnerships with regulators, working across borders with different governments, or simply focusing on growing a fast-paced, highly competitive business. For Brad, adopting a learning mindset and systems thinking has been critical to his success in the role—and something he seeks to foster in others.

I spend a significant part of every day trying to develop and augment the skill in everyone around me, including myself, because you better not forget your own ability to keep trying to get better"

The phrase I find myself using frequently right now is people need to be able to do two things really well: They need to be able to inspect the trees, and analyze the forest. If you analyze the forest without inspecting the trees, you don't really know what you're talking about. But if all you can do is inspect the trees, there is a real limit to your ability to contribute analytically.”

If there's a frustration I sometimes find, it's when I get reports that are like tree inspection reports. Here is a report and it describes 10 trees. And I'm like, ‘That's great, but what about the forest?’ And then somebody says, ‘Well, let me tell you about another 10 trees.’” What you're making me do is become the forest analyzer. Everybody has to be good at both of these things. And analyzing the forest is fundamentally, in my view, at least in part, an exercise in identifying patterns.”

Brad Smith
Former GC and Microsoft’s President and Vice Chair

So, while GCs have not always shone brightly on succession radars, this may begin to change.

Historically, the characteristics of a CEO have largely been at odds with the characteristics of a GC”  “Yet in the increasingly more global, complex and more highly regulated geopolitical environment that organizations now operate in, a GC’s ability to cut through the chaos is giving them an opportunity to elevate themselves in ways they have arguably not had the opportunity to do before. And, of course, every so often, a rare individual like Brad comes forward and proves just what is possible if you look beyond your usual suspects.”

Jennifer O’Connell
RRA Global Legal, Regulatory, and Compliance Practice Leader

Join us as we press forward toward new definitions of great leadership

Find out more

Why leadership advisory hasn't had its data-driven revolution

What We Know: The State of Data-Driven Leadership Advisory

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices