The ROI of Responsible AI: Leveraging the Synergies Between Sustainability and AI To Create Enterprise Value | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The ROI of Responsible AI: Leveraging the Synergies Between Sustainability and AI To Create Enterprise Value

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationSocial ImpactTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersSustainability Officers

Article

Kurt Harrison

March 11, 2024

8 min

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationSocial ImpactTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

Companies will benefit from building their sustainability and AI approaches in tandem, drawing on each as a tool for optimizing the other.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

Sustainability and AI have emerged as two of the most transformational forces to impact business in a generation.

Multiple studies have shown that sustainability and AI (along with geopolitical uncertainty) are at the top of the agendas for CEOs and boards of directors around the world.1 Though both have separately evolved from abstract concepts to business imperatives, sustainability and AI share two important characteristics:

Both require paradigm shifts in how businesses operate, how leaders manage, and how boards govern.

Both can create significant enterprise value when implemented effectively – but can also destroy significant value if mishandled.

The World Economic Forum's 2024 Global Risk Report highlights the significance of sustainability and technology as key risk drivers. In the near-term, four out of the ten highest impact risks are related to sustainability and technology. And within the next ten years, the report shows that eight of the top ten highest impact risks are associated with these two areas.2  Companies must acknowledge the pervasive risk associated with sustainability and technology innovation issues, while simultaneously recognizing the scale of opportunity and potential value both present.

World Economic Forum’s 2024 Top 10 Risks

Source: World Economic Forum Global Risks Report 2024

While senior leaders everywhere list sustainability and AI as critical to their strategic differentiation, their interplay is often overlooked. Understanding their interconnectedness is essential for leaders to both maximize opportunities and minimize risks.

There are so many parallels between AI and Sustainability: both spaces are moving quickly, with regulations evolving seemingly by the day. And for each, there’s an incredible sense of urgency to figure it all out and to govern it effectively.”

Ann Tracy
Chief Sustainability Officer, Colgate Palmolive

To better understand the potential interplay between these two forces and how companies are already leveraging them to create value, Russell Reynolds Associates spoke with more than 30 global sustainability and technology senior leaders about how they are capturing this opportunity. Our findings reveal that companies will benefit from building their sustainability and AI approaches in tandem, drawing on each as a tool for optimizing the other.

AI for Sustainability: Increasing efficiency and value creation

AI’s most immediate sustainability opportunity? Reducing companies’ carbon emissions and enhancing their climate adaptation initiatives.

According to BCG, currently proven AI-enabled use cases could reduce emissions by 5-10% by 2030, creating $1-3 trillion in economic value.3  CEOs recognize this potential, with 53% believing that AI will increase the sustainability of their organizations; among companies recognized as “AI pioneers”, this figure rises to 62%.4

When applied to sustainability or any other strategic priorities, AI offers three types of use cases: helping companies to better understand context, optimize processes, or make better decisions.

In the context of emissions reduction and climate resiliency, these AI use cases encompass two objectives: mitigation and adaptation.

Mitigation involves reducing and removing emissions, measuring progress, and tracking results. This could include using AI to understand Scope 3 emissions across a supply chain and down to the product level; to optimize fleet efficiency by identifying most fuel efficient travel routes and times; or to decide on changes to your product portfolio to maximize revenue while minimizing emissions.

So much of the waste in our society is due to imperfect information, and AI offers the opportunity to dramatically improve in this area.”

D. Evan van Hook,
Chief Sustainability Officer, Viridi
(formerly Honeywell)

Adaptation entails forecasting climate and environmental hazards, developing plans to address them, and responding in real-time. This could include using AI to understand risks to ecosystems that are critical to the value chain, whether through deforestation, water availability, sea level rise or extreme weather events; to optimize waste sorting and recycling processes by identifying minute levels of recyclable materials in products; or to decide where to position critical infrastructure based on forecasts of rising sea levels and/or potentially water-stressed areas.

Across all use cases and objectives, it is clear that leveraging AI for sustainability creates long term business value.

It is important to note that AI can fill skills gaps in sustainability, but cannot replace the role of a chief sustainability officer (CSO) or an expert sustainability function. AI brings specific competencies to sustainability initiatives, but human leadership remains essential for strategic direction and decision-making.

Sustainability for AI: Embedding Responsible AI principles across the enterprise

While AI offers significant potential to improve sustainability initiatives, the reverse is also true. Sustainability provides a valuable lens for enhancing the performance of and reducing the risks associated with rolling out a generative AI program.

Companies must start with accountability and governance structures when bringing generative AI into their organizations. They must embrace that every company is now a technology and data company. Taking this approach will transform how legal, business operations, and other functions work together to break down silos, and most importantly to invest in people to help them make a difference together and build a culture of ‘why,’ ‘why not,’ and ‘what if.’”

Kevin Fumai,
Assistant General Counsel for AI Governance,
Oracle

The sudden and meteoric rise of generative and predictive AI tools has fueled stakeholders at every level to inquire about their organization’s plans to implement a credible AI program.

However, this leads to perhaps the biggest risk of all around AI for boards and CEOS – “acceleration risk.” RRA research found that, while 71% of leaders report having taken at least one step towards bringing generative AI into their team’s workflow, only 32% are confident in their own ability to implement AI in their organizations today.5 With the speed at which the market is responding to GenAI, many leaders are making decisions about the tech without fully understanding it, which can lead to poorly designed platforms that fail to incorporate the human element, and lack transparency, fairness, accountability, and privacy. The speed limit is increasing, but it doesn’t always make sense to be first.

C-suites and boards must be aware of the extensive list of potential AI risks, ranging from bias perpetuation to the significant increase in energy and water usage required to keep large data centers operable. To mitigate “acceleration risk,” generative AI implementation GenAI needs to be an evolution, not a revolution.

Principles of Responsible AI:

Transparency and explainability

Fairness and bias mitigation

Privacy and security

Accountability and responsibility

Continuous monitoring and improvement

Human control and oversight

To avoid these risks, it is crucial to embed Responsible AI practices from the outset.  Advocates for Responsible AI stress the need to prioritize principles such as transparency, explainability, fairness and accountability, so that generative AI outputs are reliable, and do not produce or reinforce unintended or biased outcomes. Such principle-led design requires a nuanced understanding of a company’s stakeholders, ability to anticipate unintended consequences, and awareness of the multifaceted ecosystem in which the company operates.

It is perhaps no surprise that these are the exact same traits which differentiate best-in-class sustainability leaders.

Leveraging the sustainable leader model for Responsible AI enablement

Leaders looking to embed Responsible AI principles into their AI applications will benefit from collaborating with their sustainability peers in the earliest phases of their AI journey. Sustainability leaders bring four key characteristics that will benefit any Responsible AI efforts:

Multi-level systems thinking: In recognizing the interconnectivity of the broader ecosystem in which their business operates, sustainability leaders are uniquely equipped to identify AI’s unintended consequences and impacts on stakeholders.

Stakeholder inclusion: As the primary advocate for and conduit to a company’s stakeholders, sustainability leaders can help translate those stakeholders’ priorities and concerns to AI leaders, and drive cross-functional collaboration across finance, HR, legal and compliance to ensure a smoother transition to an AI-enabled enterprise.

Disruptive innovation: Sustainability leaders are adept at challenging traditional approaches and identifying novel solutions, attributes that are particularly useful for helping AI leaders to identify levers for reducing AI’s emissions footprint and resource usage.

Long-term activation: Using longer-term time horizons for evaluating ROI and identifying risks and opportunities comes naturally to sustainability leaders; AI leaders will benefit from this perspective when needing to make the business case for prioritizing Responsible AI to the board and CEO

Integrating Responsible AI principles from the outset is crucial, as retrofitting them later can be not only challenging, but significantly more costly. A recent BCG study found that organizations that build Responsible AI capabilities before scaling AI are 28% less likely to report failures.6 Moreover, a study by Bain & Company found that companies with a comprehensive, responsible approach to AI earn twice as much profit from their AI efforts.7

Creating enterprise value via coordinated sustainability and AI strategies

Advice for Chief Sustainability Officers, Chief Digital Officers and other C-suite leaders

Harmonize your sustainability, AI, and business strategies: Leaders must ensure that their approaches are aligned across all three areas to avoid making progress in one area at the expense of another. The entire C-suite must be engaged in this effort to ensure that implications for finance, HR and other corporate functions are surfaced and addressed.

Scrutinize your data…but only insofar as it moves the needle: When it comes to AI, the “garbage in, garbage out” principle reigns, as the efficacy of generative AI models depends on the quality of the data used to train them. Data integrity and accuracy are therefore crucial for establishing confidence in any AI output. At the same time, leaders must avoid the “data trap” that sees their team’s precious resources absorbed by data collection. Use your enterprise sustainability strategy and materiality assessment to determine the most important levers of impact, then keep your data collection efforts laser focused on those alone.

Foster a culture of innovation across your organization: Encouraging teams, especially junior colleagues, to explore innovative ways of using AI can lead to breakthroughs. Establishing cross-functional teams, "shadowing" programs, and external partnerships can provide fresh perspectives and drive innovation.

Intentionally build AI and sustainability bench strength: According to BCG, three in four leaders cite insufficient access to AI expertise as a primary obstacle to using AI in their emissions reduction efforts.8  Investing in training programs and resources to educate employees about AI concepts, technologies, and applications is essential. Workshops, seminars, online courses, and incentives for pursuing advanced degrees or certifications can help build a foundational understanding of AI

While technology of the past was designed to serve a singular purpose, generative AI can be deployed to solve myriad problems in an organization. Because of this, data quality becomes even more crucial to establish confidence in AI-generated results. Any credible generative AI approach must be built upon a human-centric foundation - technology needs to be grounded in an organization’s people and culture, and may require changes in the human capital function. The goal shouldn’t be displacing people, but rather equipping them with the tools required to upskill for better decision-making. AI might supply a new framework, but human judgment, creativity, and strategic thinking are still crucial to lead and develop effectively.

Authors

Kurt Harrison co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Sustainability Practice. He is based in New York.

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.

Robert Alexander is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. He is based in New York City.

References

1 McKinsey & Company What matters most? Eight CEO priorities for 2024

2 World Economic Forum The Global Risks Report 2024

3 BCG Accelerating Climate Action with AI

4 Workday C-suite Global AI Indicator Report 2023

5 Russell Reynolds Associates Embracing the Unknown: How Leaders Engage with Generative AI in the Face of Uncertainty

6 BCG Accelerating Climate Action with AI 2023

7 Bain & Company Adapting Your Organization for Responsible AI 2024

8 BCG How AI Can Be a Powerful Tool in the Fight Against Climate Change 2022

The ROI of Responsible AI

Leveraging the Synergies Between Sustainability and AI To Create Enterprise Value

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices