Tech's Gender Reboot: Fostering Female Technology Leadership in India | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Tech's Gender Reboot: Fostering Female Technology Leadership in India

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

Khushboo Kumra Raja

January 22, 2024

5 min

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

Women are vastly underrepresented in India’s tech leadership. RRA outlines strategies to bridge this gap and elevate more women to the top.

Close

Khushboo Kumra Raja

Mumbai

Despite the global dialogue on improving gender gap in the workplace, women remain significantly underrepresented in executive roles. In the technology industry, which has been historically male-dominated, women hold only 28% of leadership roles globally.1 In India, the landscape is even more challenging. According to Skillsoft’s 2022 Women in Tech Report – India Region, out of 1,004 surveyed women tech professionals, a mere 7% hold executive-level positions such as Chief Information Officer, Chief Technology Officer, or Chief Information Security Officer.2 This disparity not only highlights a gender diversity gap in India but also underscores the systemic barriers hindering women's advancement in technology.

As stakeholders increasingly demand equitable opportunities throughout organizations, diversity measures are essential for fostering a truly inclusive workplace. This involves diligently tracking diversity goals, thoroughly examining inclusive leadership practices, and gaining insights into the factors behind women's departures. Beyond tactical measures, organizations should also implement long-term practices to create a more inclusive environment. To understand how organizations can better support women in tech, Russell Reynolds Associates interviewed senior technology executives from the country. These senior leaders, who have had successful professional journeys acknowledged that while favorable personal situations with supportive families are critical, organizations can also more actively adopt strategies to create inclusive, equitable, achievement-oriented career paths for women, including:

Embracing Diverse Choices in Career Paths

Creating pathways through mentorship & sponsorship

Recognizing and challenging unconscious bias

Encouraging open conversations

Supporting women through critical personal milestones like marriage, childbirth, or elder care is not just about having policies in place, but about effectively communicating and implementing them. When organizations stand by their female employees during these challenging times, they not only nurture the talent within but also earn the loyalty and engagement of these women"

Kamolika Peres
Vice President & Managing Director India/South Asia at ServiceNow

Embrace Diverse Choices in Career Paths

To achieve gender equity in leadership, organizations need to include women in challenging and impactful roles, while also acknowledging and respecting that men and women, depending on their individual journeys, could have different career motivators, approaches, and expectations—both within and outside of work. This requires a dual strategy:

Automatically include women leaders in succession processes:  Instead of waiting for women to actively opt-in, organizations should consider automatically including all women in leadership succession plans, unless they choose to opt-out. This approach ensures all qualified candidates are in contention, helping to narrow the gender gap. It's about providing flexibility, creating a safe space, and leaders taking an active role in encouraging and fostering women's career growth.

Don’t penalize those who 'opt-out': Equally important is recognizing that career paths are not one-size-fits-all. Women, like their male counterparts, may have varying professional aspirations and life circumstances. Therefore, organizations should create an environment where opting out of certain roles or responsibilities does not equate to a lack of ambition or commitment.

The “opt-in” versus “opt-out” is a major mental shift. Research shows that women often need to be asked to take on leadership roles, as they tend to undervalue their own skills for myriad reasons—fear of backlash over seeming “too aggressive,” cultural differences, or lack of bandwidth between work and home responsibilities. This flexibility acknowledges and celebrates the diverse life stages and choices women navigate, and ensures their careers are not unfairly hindered.

Organizations should not assume that career would take a backseat for every woman who is going through a major personal transition with small kids. On the flip side, if some women want to focus on family first, a year or two of slowing down should not be that hurtful to a career spanning 30+ years.”

Chief Information officer for a large global industrial company

Create pathways through mentorship and sponsorship

One of the impactful ways to advance women in the workplace is through well-structured mentorship and sponsorship programs. While the internal networks that arise from these programs are widely recognized as vital for career development, their effectiveness varies significantly across organizations. To address this, organizations can:

Develop sponsors: Despite research confirming the important role that sponsors play in supporting the career advancement of underrepresented talent, we cannot assume that sponsorship is 1) happening at all and 2) effectively and inclusively championing others. Setting formal parameters around expectations for sponsors and establishing an intentional pairing process are important foundations.

Work to establish meaningful connections: Effective mentorship and sponsorship go beyond check-in meetings and career guidance; they encompass meaningful connections that can significantly impact a woman's career trajectory and personal growth. When done right, these programs not only contribute to a more satisfied and retained workforce but also promote an inclusive culture within the organization.

Mentorship and coaching are crucial at every stage of your career. Finding the right mentor is key because career progression is like a pyramid - it's natural for some to take a break or not change jobs.  Build your ecosystem; it's the support structure that carries you forward."

Trupti Mukker
Former Chief Operating Officer, International Business at BYJU'S

Recognize and challenge unconscious bias

Women in tech often face two predominant forms of unconscious bias: the incorrect perception that they have inferior technical skills compared to male colleagues, and the (again) incorrect assumption that they’re less committed to their careers, especially for women trying to balance family and career. These biases not only hinder fair assessment and opportunities for women but also contribute to a wider gender gap in leadership roles.

To foster a truly inclusive environment, it is important for organizations to proactively identify and challenge both unconscious and conscious biases. This involves training hiring managers to recognize and address subtle biases, and prioritizing a diverse set of candidates at the outset of every talent development pipeline. When roles are filled hastily—which happens often in early-stage companies—the urgency to make quick talent decisions can lead organizations to neglect diversity considerations. It's essential to recognize that diversity is not just an optional extra, but a critical necessity for an organization’s health, regardless of its maturity.

Challenging biases can’t be confined to the hiring process—it’s also integral to internal reviews and succession planning.

As organizations strive to unlearn biases and create more inclusive environments, it's crucial to reflect on several key questions:

Are we effectively addressing the stereotypes and challenges faced by women in tech?

Are we inadvertently making assumptions about a woman's professional commitment based on her role as a mother or caregiver?

Are we doing enough to encourage and support women in taking on more challenging roles, and are we providing them with the necessary resources and support to succeed?

Unlearning biases is a journey that requires effort and intention.”

Pramod Jajoo
SVP Technology and India Country Head, Shipbob

Encourage open conversations

Creating an environment where open conversations are not just encouraged, but are the norm, can significantly impact the retention and advancement of women leaders. This involves actively engaging women in discussions about their career goals across all levels of the organization. Such conversations can provide valuable insights into the unique challenges and aspirations of women in the organization, enabling more tailored support and development opportunities.

However, it's crucial to recognize that open dialogues are not only beneficial for women, but they also elevate the overall culture of an organization, making it more inclusive as more diverse voices are being encouraged to speak up. Modern male leaders are both allies in the pursuit of gender parity and advocate for supportive policies that enable them to be active fathers, caregivers, and partners. This support allows their spouses to pursue challenging and empowering roles at work. Including men in these conversations helps build a more inclusive culture, one that recognizes and supports the varied needs and roles of all employees. Such an approach leads to more comprehensive and effective policies, benefiting the entire organization and fostering a balanced, supportive work environment.

One of the barometers of any diversity initiative is men’s involvement. Handing the responsibility solely to the most senior woman in the room isn't effective. A successful initiative requires collaboration between men and women.”

Kamolika Peres
Vice President & Managing Director India/South Asia at ServiceNow

Looking Forward: The future of women leaders in India’s tech industry

From our discussions with female executives, a crucial perspective emerged: they seek recognition for their professional achievements rather than for their gender. Aspiring female leaders should foster a mindset that embraces growth, readily accepts challenges, and is at ease with making necessary trade-offs. Our interviewees shared the following insights:

Defining Your North Star: Establish a clear and compelling vision that can influence choices and direct the career path. Intrinsic motivation is the main catalyst needed to supercharge your career progression.

Understanding my North Star has always been my driving force. Even when faced with challenges, like  lack of support or recognition, knowing how my work impacts the larger picture keeps me motivated. "

Rucha Nanavati
Chief Information Officer at Mahindra Group

You can and should organize your work and life in a way that works for you. It is not about impressing anyone, but for you to own the moment. You can grow unapologetically.”

Kamolika Peres
Vice President & Managing Director India/South Asia at ServiceNow

Understanding the Inevitability of Trade-offs and Remaining Resilient: Career journeys are filled with compromises and challenges. Resilience in the face of setbacks is key.

Be ready for trade-offs, accept the 'no's, and keep asking. Don’t get dejected by small setbacks."

Asha Poulose Johnson
Chief Digital Officer at GE Healthcare

Recognizing the Non-linear Progression of Careers: Career trajectories are not always a straight, upward climb. Seizing the right opportunities can alter one’s professional course.

Approach your career like a marathon, with sprints in both work and personal life. It's important not to over pivot in either direction. If you start feeling stressed, remember it's a long-distance run, not a perpetual sprint."

Trupti Mukker
Former Chief Operating Officer, International Business at BYJU'S

It's a misconception to believe that careers are linear. Career paths comprise phases of plateaus interspersed with sudden leaps in responsibility. You can have a very successful career and still make it to the top, even if you take a two-year break."

Mayur Danait
Group Chief Information Officer, Heubach.

Pursuing Challenging Growth Opportunities Actively: Look for and embrace opportunities that push you out of your comfort zone.

The impact of "crucible roles" in one’s career is massive. Raise your hand to take them and give it your fullest. It will be pivotal for your learning and growth.."

Shivani Saini
Global Digital and Tech Head, Business Units at Haleon

As India’s tech industry grows, gender parity at the leadership levels should be more than a goal; it should be an integral part of the company’s culture. Closing the leadership gender gap is not only about achieving diversity targets, but also this would create a more inclusive and dynamic future for organizations.

Authors

Khushboo Kumra is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers capability and drives the DEI work in India. She is based in Mumbai.

Arunima Poricha is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers capability. She is based in New Delhi.

Suya Xiong is a member of the Technology Officers' Knowledge team. She is based in Boston.

References

1Global Leadership Forecast 2023, DDI, 2023

2 2022 Women in Tech Report India Region, Skillsoft, 2022

Tech's Gender Reboot

Fostering Female Technology Leadership in India

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices