Drivers for a High-Performing C-suite: What They Are and How Leaders Can Harness Them | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Drivers for a High-Performing C-suite: What They Are and How Leaders Can Harness Them

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Article

July 22, 2024

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Our research explores what makes a high-performing C-suite team, and the most impactful drivers for organizational performance.

Close

C-suite teams are the driving force behind a company’s strategy and overall success—they’re responsible for making strategic decisions, enabling collaboration, appropriately harnessing talent, and ultimately, driving the organization's overall success.

But what sets a high-performing C-suite team apart? RRA's 5Cs of C-suite performance identified five critical areas that influence overall C-suite performance: commitment and alignment, capability and skill, culture and behavior, composition and structure, and continuity and succession. We conducted a stated vs derived importance analysis to understand what specifically drives organizational success within each component.

We found that there were:

Key drivers: Factors that leaders rate as important to C-suite success that directly correlate with organizational performance.

Hidden drivers: Factors that are not top of mind for leaders, but greatly influence organizational performance. These are areas that leaders mistakenly overlook.

Table stakes: Factors that leaders state are important, but don’t correlate as strongly to organizational performance.

Opportunities: Factors that leaders don't state as important and have a less significant influence on organizational performance.

Figure 1: Stated vs Derived Importance

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor, H2 2023, n=2,729, CEOs, board directors, C-level executives, and next generation leaders

Key drivers

Key drivers include factors that leaders name as important and impactful toward driving organizational performance.

Our research highlights three critical areas as key drivers:

Accountability and ownership in organization performance;

Trustworthiness across the organization;

Resilience through uncertainty.

Leaders at high-performing organizations (rated excellent or very good) are 8.1 times more likely to display a high level of trust, 4.5 times more likely to demonstrate accountability and ownership, and 4.1 times more likely to display adaptability and resilience compared to those at lower performing organizations (rated fair or poor).

CEOs who can harness these qualities within their C-suite teams form the bedrock of a high-performing team. In today’s uncertain economic environment, resilience is key. Teams must be able to adapt and guide their teams through ever-changing issues, like technological change, geopolitical uncertainty, and shifting regulations. By owning their actions and demonstrating accountability, leaders cultivate a culture of transparency and trust that trickles throughout multiple levels of an organization.

Hidden drivers

Hidden drivers reveal areas that may not be as top-of-mind, but greatly influence organizational performance.

Our research emphasizes two key areas as hidden drivers:

Feeling comfortable and informed to make strategic decisions

Displaying a high commitment to organizational purpose

While commitment and comfort in making decisions may be overlooked, our research suggests that these areas have a significant impact on organizational performance. Most notably, leaders at high-performing organizations (rated excellent or very good) are 4.7 times more likely to feel comfortable making strategic decisions, and 3.6 times more likely to feel that their C-suite team displays a high commitment, compared to those at lower-performing organizations (rated fair or poor).

Leaders who demonstrate commitment to their organization’s purpose can cultivate a shared mission and direction among their teams. Moreover, CEOs who focus on creating alignment related to the organization’s purpose help empower confidence in decision making. C-suite teams that balance purpose and goals with ambiguity in business environments lead to greater overall success. While often not top of mind for leaders, these are areas that can help move the needle from a low to high-performing C-suite team.

Table stakes

Table stakes drivers—the minimum requirement for a C-suite team to perform well—are those that leaders note as important, but don’t correlate as strongly with organizational performance.

Our research outlines two notable areas as table stakes:

1. C-suite teams that can articulate an inspiring vision;
2. C-suite teams that represent a breadth of skills, background, and experience.

Notably, leaders at high-performing organizations (rated excellent or very good) are still 4.2 times more likely to articulate an inspiring vision and 3.7 times more likely to feel that their C-suite team represents a breadth of skills, background, and experience compared to those at lower-performing organizations (rated fair or poor).

While these areas have a lower impact on overall organizational performance, when asked which factors are most important to a successful C-suite, leaders rate these areas almost as highly as our key drivers. Since these areas tend to be top of mind, our research suggests that these areas can have an immediate (or short-term) influence on C-suite performance. Therefore, CEOs should focus on building a diverse C-suite team, with a breadth of skills, background, and experience to not only help foster productive tensions, but also encourage innovation within an organization. A diverse C-suite team can ultimately support success in other areas, like displaying adaptability and resilience, encouraging effective decision-making, and instilling an inspiring vision and culture.

Opportunities

This quadrant includes areas that are lower on both stated and derived importance. Leaders are less likely to rate these as important and have a smaller influence on overall organizational performance, relative to other attributes listed. Despite this, these items create value in the long term, so while they don’t correlate strongly with performance today, they can affect the performance of future C-suite teams. Our research outlines three opportunity areas:

A long-term vision/strategy for the C-suite composition;

Appropriate exposure for next-generation talent;

C-suite team that regularly reviews engagement, development, and retention plans.

A focus on succession and developing next-generation talent can improve organizational outcomes. Most notably, leaders at high-performing organizations (rated excellent or very good) are 5.5 times more likely to ensure the composition of the C-suite teams aligns with their long-term vision, 4.6 times more likely to regularly review engagement, development, and retention plans, and 4.2 times more likely to provide exposure to next-generation leaders as compared to those at lower-performing organizations (rated fair or poor).

While our research suggests that succession and developing next-generation leaders may not be top of mind for many leaders, it plays an essential role in developing a higher-performing team. Next-generation leaders are more likely to become dissatisfied when not given the appropriate exposure and engagement within an organization. Leaders can build high-performing C-suite teams by nurturing next-generation talent and evaluating the evolution of the C-suite composition as the organization matures.

What’s Next?

CEOs and boards should evaluate the strength of their C-suite team and the leaders who sit below them. While it’s important to consider organizational strategy, it is equally important to consider how your C-suite collaborates and operates. Organizations must cultivate a collective of high-performing individuals who can quickly harness opportunities and address issues in today’s dynamic business environment.

CEOs build successful C-suites when they...

Hire CxOs who are committed and aligned;

Proactively focus on their C-suite composition and take a holistic view of the team;

Ensure that leaders have the right capabilities & skills for the organization;

Enable collaboration, trust, and psychological safety that supports organizational culture and behavior;

Continually assess and engage with next-generation leaders and develop robust succession plans.

Resulting in:

Higher EQ in leaders;

More nimble responses to uncertainty;

Confidence in strategic decision-making;

More productive employees, improved performance outcomes, and accelerated growth;

Increased rate of executive retention and/or internal succession.

Methodology

Respondents were asked to rate the overall organization's performance on a 5-point scale: Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, Poor.

Respondents were also asked to rate their C-suite across a series of 10 attributes on a 4-point scale: Describes completely, describes mostly, describes somewhat, does not describe at all. The 10 attributes were then condensed into 5 components that make up our 5Cs, as outlined below:

Commitment & Alignment

• Displays high commitment to organizational purpose
• Demonstrates accountability and ownership in organizational performance

Composition & Structure

• Composition of the C-suite team aligns with the vision/strategy of the organization
as the organization matures
• C-suite represents a breadth of skills, background, and experience that contribute to strategic thinking

Capability & Skill

• Displays adaptability and resilience through uncertainty
• Feels comfortable and informed to make strategic decisions

Culture & Behavior

• Articulates an inspiring vision that aligns with the organization's values
• Displays a high level of trust that is visible across multiple levels of the organization

Continuity & Succession

• Regularly reviews engagement, development, and retention plans
• Provides appropriate exposure to emerging or next generation leaders

Using these measures, we conducted a relative importance regression analysis to better understand the relationship between organizational performance and these five components (The degree to which one item influences organizational performance is relative to all other items in the model.)

Methodology: Stated vs Derived Importance

A stated vs derived importance analysis helps us better understand the key drivers for a high-performing C-suite, while also revealing hidden drivers that may not be top of mind for leaders. Via our H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor—a global survey of boards, CEOs, CxOs, and next-generation leaders that tracks key threats to organizational health and leadership preparedness to face them—we asked leaders to evaluate their C-suite team on a set of factors. We then asked them to rate how important they think those factors are to the performance of the C-suite (known as stated importance). Then, we conducted a relative importance regression analysis on self-reported organizational performance (known as derived importance). Derived importance helps reveal the underlying drivers of C-suite performance, which may be overlooked in stated importance.

Global Leadership Monitor

Learn more

Methodology

Find out more

Authors

Ela Buczynska and Gabrielle Lieberman of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

The authors wish to thank the thousands of leaders from RRA’s global network who responded to the Global Leadership Monitor over the last three years. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2024 and beyond.

How CEOs Can Build and Maintain a High-Performing C-suite

Read more

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices