Seven Steps to Successful CEO Succession | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Seven Steps to Successful CEO Succession

SuccessionCEO SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionCulture AnalyticsTeam Performance

Article

October 12, 2023

6 min

SuccessionCEO SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionCulture AnalyticsTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Multi-year CEO succession planning offers significant benefits over a sudden CEO search.

Close

Sarah Eames

New York

Justus O’Brien

Stamford

Ernie Brittingham

New York

The market for qualified, motivated, and innovative CEOs is rapidly shifting. The external risks of 2020 and 2021 saw CEO departures fall each quarter. Then, in 2022, global CEO turnover hit a five-year high. And the trend of significant turnover at the top continues, creating a supply imbalance for great CEOs.

This is making isolated CEO searches even more costly and risky. A lack of effective succession practices destroys almost $1 trillion of value each year among the S&P 1500 alone.

The solution? Robust, multi-year CEO succession planning.

It’s the most effective way for boards to de-risk CEO transition and position the organization for ongoing success. Our research shows that multi-year succession planning enables organizations to identify, develop, and retain top talent, raise team performance, strengthen culture, increase value creation, and achieve their strategy. Yet just 25% of all leaders say they proactively engage in it.

Components of robust CEO succession planning

Multi-year CEO succession planning begins with defining the vision for the future of the organization. It then invests in the development of internal candidates and often includes external strategic sourcing and mapping. Best-in-class planning integrates strategy, culture, assessment, development, and team effectiveness, all aligned to a clear vision. The steps below can and should overlap in a multi-year succession planning process.

Seven Steps to Successful CEO SuccessionPhase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Phase 4
Phase 5
Phase 6
Phase 7

Action

Create a forward-looking strategy and success profile
This is some text inside of a div block.

Organizational Benefits

Aligns stakeholders around a succession plan and what that means for the next CEO.

Phase 1: Create a forward-looking strategy and success profile

Thoughtful succession planning results in marked financial returns, generating clear value for companies and shareholders.
Currently, only 25% of leaders say their organizations have proactive succession plans. That’s despite the highest performing and most progressive boards starting to think about their next succession as soon as they select the current CEO.
Developing a robust planning process and succession strategy, including a forward-looking CEO success profile, helps future-proof the organization. It uncovers opportunities for cultural transformation and shows the type of leader who will be able to motivate the organization toward its next phase of growth.
Driving an inclusive and efficient process means engaging the right stakeholders early and often.

01 / 07

Action

Assess leaders using Leadership SpanTM
This is some text inside of a div block.

Organizational Benefits

Predicts success in the CEO role to de-risk succession decisions.

Phase 2: Assess internal leaders using Leadership SpanTM

Our Global Leadership Monitor has uncovered that, while psychometric assessment is best practice when evaluating potential CEOs, only 20% of organizations routinely include it in their succession planning.
By adding scientific rigor to the assessment process, truer and often less obvious potential successors can emerge, improving leadership diversity and organizational performance.
A study found that companies in the top quartile for ethnic diversity in management are 35% more likely to have financial returns above their industry mean, and those in the top quartile for gender diversity are 15% more likely to have returns above the industry mean.
Our scientific approach to leadership assessment, known as Leadership Span™, predicts executives’ success in complex, competitive environments to de-risk succession decisions.

02 / 07

Action

Develop and coach potential successors
This is some text inside of a div block.

Organizational Benefits

Exposes candidates to the experiences that will help them flourish in the CEO role.

Phase 3: Develop and coach potential successors

Leaders who don’t receive effective coaching and development are 6.5 times more likely to say they would leave their organization.
Succession planning gives an opportunity to develop and nurture leaders with diverse backgrounds, ensuring they have the skills they’ll need to be successful if they step into the CEO role.
Tailored leadership development offerings provide the unique opportunity to develop multiple potential CEO successors in line with an organization’s cultural and strategic goals.
Expanding potential successors’ knowledge and capabilities by rotating and expanding the scope of their roles gives them new perspectives to prepare them for managing all functions and geographies.

03 / 07

Action

Align culture to organizational strategy
This is some text inside of a div block.

Organizational Benefits

Build leadership team capabilities to drive the right culture that connects to future strategy.

Phase 4: Align culture to organizational strategy

Poor work place culture accounted for $223 billion in risk and turnover costs over just five years.
As the forward-looking strategy highlights the desired organizational culture and the organization prepares its successors for a potential step up, the entire leadership team will become more aligned to and more strongly demonstrate the culture. And when the new CEO takes the helm, they’ll embody a culture the whole organization can recognize and support during a time of transition.
Leadership is the most important lever when it comes to changing corporate culture. Yet only 56% of executives say their executive leadership team is role modeling the right culture and behaviors.
When MIT Sloan Management Review studied nearly 700 US companies, they found little to no correlation between stated company values and employee perceptions of the organization, highlighting the pervasive gap.
We help leadership understand and embrace its company culture, align cultural changes with the company strategy, and take steps towards improving it, including incorporating culture into executive recruitment.

04 / 07

Action

Enhance top team effectiveness using our Productive Tensions Model
This is some text inside of a div block.

Organizational Benefits

Accelerates the potential of the leadership team in line with the organization's vision and operating environment changes.

Phase 5: Enhance top team effectiveness using our Productive Tensions Model

Having supported thousands of successions over more than 50 years, we know high-performing organizations understand that top team effectiveness leads to revenue and EBITDA growth. A large part of an incoming CEO’s success comes from having a team that is already high functioning.
Yet approximately 40% of leaders don’t believe their executive leadership teams have the right capabilities to lead their organization successfully.
If there’s no harmony at the top, none can exist in the rest of the organization. Along side their core role in setting strategic priorities and mobilizing their people for the next inflection point, C-suites serve as a model for vision, purpose, and culture.
When top teams overcome challenges, they make a measurable impact. On average, high-performing teams are 27% better at ensuring the organization’s future readiness.
Our proprietary Productive Tensions Model accelerates C-Suite teams’ ability to place collective objectives above individual preferences and motivations to achieve enterprise-level success.

05 / 07

Action

Benchmark the external CEO market and run selection-oriented assessments including contextual immersion
This is some text inside of a div block.

Organizational Benefits

Evaluates candidates’ readiness and fit to drive organization-wide success.

Phase 6: Benchmark the external CEO market and run selection-oriented assessments, including contextual immersion

11% of externally recruited CEOs leave within two years, compared to 6.9% of CEOs who have gone through an internal succession process.
Yet it’s best practice to have a full understanding of the external talent landscape as you go through your CEO succession process.
Conducting confidential strategic sourcing exercises of the global talent pool helps benchmark internal successors against external candidates to ensure you choose the best option for your next CEO.
Finalist CEO candidates (both internal and external) should undergo a selection-oriented assessment that includes a contextual immersion. Contextual immersions are CEO-specific assessments that showcase the leadership behaviors candidates use in situations which are unique to the top role, often involving pressure and ambiguity. This unique experience allows the board to select the candidate who is the best fit for the organization’s forward-looking strategy.

06 / 07

Action

Appoint a new CEO and provide support with a tailored transition plan
This is some text inside of a div block.

Organizational Benefits

Cuts business disruption and accelerates the achievement of peak performance.

Phase 7: Appoint a new CEO and provide support with a tailored transition plan

Under performance of externally recruited CEOs decreases total shareholder return by about half a percentage point, costing investors in the S&P 1500 approximately $182 billion each year. Where companies do promote CEOs from within but fail to properly prepare them to take over, organizations lose an additional 0.3%, or $109 billion across the S&P 1500.
75% of executives consider themselves unprepared for a position because of inadequate onboarding processes.
Revenue grows 2.5x when there is an effective onboarding program.
Building an integrated transition plan, complemented by expert advice, and establishing clear metrics of success will help new CEOs create confidence, decrease time to productivity, and increase their chances of a long-term tenure.
By tailoring the transition plan and adding experienced external advisors, we can reduce the time to productivity by up to two months.

07 / 07

Meet our CEO succession experts​

Sarah Eames

New York

Justus O’Brien

Stamford

Ernie Brittingham

New York

Seven Steps to Successful CEO Succession

Download full article

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Speak to a consultant

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices