Six Ways to Address the AI Leadership Deficit | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Six Ways to Address the AI Leadership Deficit

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

June 20, 2024

7 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

We share how leaders can bridge the gap between their AI optimism and current practical concerns.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Tristan Jervis

London

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

Leaders see AI acumen as crucial, but aren’t confident in their personal or organization’s ability to embrace the technology today.

In the six months since we first asked leaders about generative artificial intelligence (GenAI), confidence in the technology’s potential has remained high.

According to Russell Reynolds Associates’ most recent Global Leadership Monitor, there’s significant enthusiasm around how AI might revolutionize organizations, with 74% of leaders reporting excitement around AI’s potential to dramatically improve team productivity, and 58% believing in AI’s potential to create new revenue streams in their organization (Figure 1).

And while it’s impossible to avoid wondering about the potential downstream impacts on workforces, leaders are far more likely to believe that AI will create new jobs in their organizations than they are to be worried about AI causing layoffs (57% vs 15% strongly agree/agree).

Figure 1: Leaders’ enthusiasm around AI’s potential to change their organization (H1 2024)

Six ways to address the AI leadership deficitMost leaders are enthusiastic about…
% of leaders who strongly agree/agree…

AI-driven productivity improvements

of leaders are excited about AI’s potential to dramatically improve team productivity.

The potential for new revenue streams

of leaders are excited about AI’s potential to create new revenue streams in their organization.

AI-driven new job creation

of leaders believe that AI will create new jobs in their organization.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n= 1,384 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders, and board directors

However, this optimism falters when leaders consider the realities of their organization’s capabilities

Regardless of whether this is increasing pessimism or a natural low point in the AI learning curve, it’s clear that leaders are noting significant gaps in their organization’s data quality, processes, and talent capabilities to guide AI use that’s both impactful and ethical.

Poor data quality and AI processes

Leaders lack confidence in their organization’s data capabilities, with 31% agreeing that their organization has accurate, high-quality data to use in GenAI solutions, while 34% disagree (Figure 2). And, leaders are even less optimistic about their organization’s accompanying AI processes and training, as only 27% agree that their organization has provided the right level of guidance to harness GenAI ethically and safely, and only 24% agree that they have the right processes in place to protect against AI misuse.

Only

20%

of all leaders agree that their organization has the right expertise on the board to advise on generative AI implementation

Dismal views on talent’s AI capabilities

Only a small portion of leaders are confident in their leaders’, employees’, and board’s ability to embrace GenAI. This concern is especially pronounced at board level, as only 20% of all leaders agree that their organization has the right expertise on the board to advise on generative AI implementation (Figure 2).

Compared to six months ago, fewer leaders agree that they have the right technical skills or people in-house to implement GenAI solutions, falling from 33% to 27%. This is likely a function of leaders learning more about AI’s complexities and, by extension, recognizing the gap between current state and future requirements to realistically harness the technology.

Figure 2: Leaders’ views on their organizations’ abilities to embrace generative AI (H1 2024)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1680 CEOs, C-suite, board, and generation leaders.

Leaders also lack confidence in their personal AI skills

These harsh views aren’t sequestered to leaders’ views of each other—they also aren’t feeling particularly confident in themselves. In fact, while 76% of leaders believe that a strong understanding of GenAI will be required for future C-suite members, only 37% of all leaders are confident that they personally have the right skills to implement AI in their organizations.

76%*

of all leaders agree that “A strong understanding of generative AI will be a required skill for future C-suite members”
*up 4pp in the last 6 months

while only

37%**

are confident that they have the right skills to implement AI in their organizations.

**up 5pp in the last 6 months

This confidence level has remained relatively flat, increasing five percentage points over the last six months.

The one exception? CEOs. While six months ago, only 26% of CEOs reported confidence in their personal AI skills, this has jumped to 37%—meaning CEOs are gaining confidence more rapidly than their counterparts (Figure 3).

Given the nature of the CEO role, this initial skepticism makes sense. However, there’s been a major push to increase CEO exposure to and comfort with AI, which likely explains CEO’s recent confidence jump.

Figure 3: % of CEOs who strongly agree/agree with the statement, “I am confident that I have the right skills to help implement AI in my organization”

H2 2023

H1 2024

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n=198 CEOs; H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=348 CEOs

The emerging AI leadership deficit

This gap is creating an AI leadership deficit, in which leaders see AI skills as crucial for the future but lack confidence in their personal or organization’s ability to embrace it today.

What is responsible AI?

Responsible AI is a set of practices used to ensure that artificial intelligence is developed and deployed in an ethical and legal way across a range of sociotechnical issues, including user privacy, bias mitigation, data security and accuracy, trust, and transparency.

Not only does this create risk at the organizational level, it has serious implications for responsible AI implementation. When we asked leaders what they’ve done to ensure responsible AI use, they reported a wide range of actions—from leadership changes to tech investments to banning AI entirely.  But within this range of responses, two notable groups arose:

1. Those who created internal policies, processes, and trainings around responsible AI.

2. Those who have done nothing to ensure responsible AI use.

Those who haven’t taken action account for 35% of respondents, making this the most common answer.

While you might expect this 35% of leaders to overlap with the 31% of leaders who haven’t taken any steps to implement GenAI, that’s actually not the case. Concerningly, 21% of those who haven’t taken any action on responsible AI have gone ahead and implemented AI in their organization.

And while 21% of 35% of leaders (effectively 7%) may not seem worth commenting on, consider that this 7% represents early AI adopters, and may have a disproportionate effect on shaping the understanding of and approaches to AI in organizations. So while they represent a small portion of the leaders we surveyed, it’s likely that this population has an outsized impact on the way we think about and interact with AI.

Six recommendations for an AI-enabled business transformation

To bridge the gap between this future AI optimism and current practical concerns, consider the following:

1. Your leadership team needs to match your business transformation ambitions.

The rise of AI isn’t just about implementing new tools—we are in the realm of full business model transformation. As AI brings a seismic shift to the way we work, public and private sector leaders need to rethink how their organizations fundamentally operate. AI strategy loses its meaning without a capable execution team. As such, it’s key to have a clear-eyed view on which capabilities your organization has in-house, where any gaps may occur, and how your talent strategy needs to adapt to your future-state goals.

2. This isn’t a mission for the ‘Hero CEO’—take a team approach to AI ownership, literacy, and ethics.

It’s hard for corporate leaders to think about the time horizons AI requires, especially when they aren’t digital natives. As such, they need a team of people around them to lighten this load and weigh in on how AI can factor into their organizations. An AI strategy isn’t complete without accompanying accountability, and that accountability can’t be managed by one person. Provide clarity around who drives strategy, who is responsible for day-to-day execution, and AI’s specific value creation opportunities.

3. Rather than looking to early AI adopters, develop an AI strategy rooted in responsible principles that align with how your organization functions and your intended AI usage.

Guidance like the NIST AI Risk Management Framework provides recommendations for ethically implementing AI across industries. Once you’ve decided which framework best suits your needs, develop clear documentation around AI usage, your organization’s responsible AI principles, and how you’ll audit both.

4. Create sunnier views around your ethical AI implementation by demonstrating a commitment to managing culture.

We’ve heard countless musings about how organizations will deploy AI—and whether those use cases will have a positive or negative personal impact on people. To address this, commit to actively managing your organization’s culture. Our data shows that when leaders believe that their senior leadership teams are taking active ownership of their organization’s culture, they are twice as likely to agree that their organization has provided the right level of guidance to harness generative AI ethically and safely. Create clear communication plans around your internal and external AI use cases and policies, upskilling and reskilling programs, and how AI will drive long-term impact.

5. Consider an AI ethics leader to oversee a diverse team of thought leaders and advise the board and C-suite.

Establishing and maintaining ethical AI policies isn’t a one-person job—it would be near-impossible to find someone with this range of skills, and the field is changing too quickly for one person to keep up with. An AI ethics leader can oversee a team that brings technical, regulatory, industry, and organizational knowledge, as well as business-savvy communications skills, and cross-organizational partnerships.

6. Look for—and strive to be—a well-rounded leader.

Today, most companies don’t have one specific leader whose primary focus is to identify and address AI issues across the enterprise. What’s more, the people involved with AI tend to be experts in subjects such as technology, business, law, and regulatory compliance and lack expertise in subjects like psychology, sociology, and philosophy, which are essential to tackling business and ethical issues effectively. In an AI-enabled future, leaders who embrace seemingly opposing schools of thought—for example, engineers who have studied philosophy and have learned to develop crisp mental models—will be better equipped to elevate their thinking, effectively leverage these new tools, and deploy human-centered judgment, creativity, and strategic thinking.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.
Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.
George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in London.
Tuck Rickards is a senior member and former leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in San Francisco.

The authors wish to thank the 2,700+ leaders from RRA’s global network who completed the H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2024 and beyond.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices