What Are Leaders Actually Doing About Generative AI? 6 Key Learnings | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Are Leaders Actually Doing About Generative AI? 6 Key Learnings

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

February 13, 2024

7 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We examined how leaders are responding to generative AI by industry, function, and region.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Tristan Jervis

London

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

There’s no question that generative AI is one of the buzziest innovations of the last year. But with all the hype around generative AI (GenAI), it’s hard to parse what actions have leaders actually taken to implement the tech—and if that progress differs between industries, functions, and regions.

To find out, Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed over 2,500 leaders globally in September of 2023, learning that:

Nearly three-quarters of leaders have taken steps towards embracing GenAI, but few have actually implemented it

Leaders implementing GenAI are focusing more on evaluating its potential vs. adjusting talent strategies

Organizational performance doesn’t have a strong bearing on GenAI implementation progress

When it comes to GenAI implementation progress, the technology industry leads the way

Strategy, technology, and go-to-market functions are most likely to have implemented GenAI, while finance and HR have been slower to embrace the technology

Leaders in the Americas are slightly more likely to have taken action on GenAI

Nearly three-quarters of leaders have taken steps towards embracing GenAI, but actual implementation is low

Whether it’s part of a strategic plan or a reaction to current market buzz, the majority of leaders globally are making moves around GenAI, but few have actually implemented the tech. Nearly three-quarters (71%) have taken a step towards embracing GenAI in their function or team’s workflow. Conversely, 29% have taken no action (Figure 1).

Within the 71% of leaders who have taken action, 33% are in the initial investigation phase, making this the most common stage globally. A similar proportion of leaders (32%) are in the developing (12%) and piloting (20%) phases. Only 7% of leaders are using GenAI in their day-to-day workflows.

Figure 1: Leaders’ progress in their generative AI implementation journeys

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,038 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders

Leaders implementing GenAI are focusing more on evaluating its potential vs. adjusting talent strategies

Evaluating internal capabilities and potential legal risks have taken precedent over major talent interventions, like appointing a Head of AI or workforce reductions.

Nearly 60% of leaders say that they’ve evaluated internal capabilities, while nearly 50% report assessing the legal risks associated with implementing GenAI. Conversely, 21% have appointed a dedicated leader for the organization’s holistic AI strategy and just 7% say they’ve reduced their workforce (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Actions leaders are taking to implement generative AI globally

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 596 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders

Organizational performance doesn’t have a strong bearing on GenAI implementation progress

When we compared how leaders rate their organization’s 2023 overall performance to their GenAI implementation progress, there were no notable differences between those with positive or negative business outlooks. This demonstrates how seriously leaders are taking GenAI’s future impact.

Via our Monitor, we know that 72% of all leaders agree that a strong understanding of GenAI will be a required skill for future C-suite leaders. It’s telling that—even for leaders who view their organization’s performance negatively—implementing GenAI is a priority.

Figure 3: Leaders’ generative AI implementation progress vs overall organizational performance

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 380 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders ranking their organization as ‘excellent/very good;’ 319 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders ranking their organization as ‘good;’ 338 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders ranking their organization as ‘fair/poor’

When it comes to GenAI implementation progress, the technology industry leads the way

Perhaps unsurprisingly, organizations in the tech industry are most likely to engage with GenAI, with 84% of tech leaders reporting having taken at least one step towards embracing the technology, and 19% using it in their day-to-day workflows (Figure 4). Professional services organizations have also made significant progress, with 10% of leaders saying they’re using GenAI day-to-day. These organizations are using AI to deliver faster client communications, automate processes, and analyze data.

The healthcare industry has also taken significant steps towards implementing GenAI, with 20% of organizations piloting GenAI programs and 4% using it in their daily workflows. Healthcare and healthtech leaders are using these tools to improve clinical decision-making, increase diagnosis comprehension, and simplify claims submissions. In fact, the first drug to be discovered by AI began late stage trials in November 2023.

Financial services leaders have also begun making moves around GenAI, with 8% already using it in their day-to-day, and 32% in the piloting or developing phases. Major players like JPMorgan and Citigroup report using AI for fraud detection and risk assessment, and plan to eventually use these tools to help clients personalize investments, calculate credit scores, and optimize portfolios. The majority of consumer industry has also taken steps to implement, using GenAI to manage customer analytics and engagement, data governance, and optimize content.

The non-profit and industrial & natural resources industries are least likely to have responded to GenAI, as 44% and 43% of these leaders report taking no action, respectively (Figure 4). This is likely due to a lack of financial resourcing and/or difficulties drawing tech talent to these industries. Still, both are investigating GenAI, with 10% of non-profit and 14% of industrial organizations piloting programs.

Figure 4: % of leaders who have taken action towards implementing generative AI by industry

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N=156 consumer leaders, N=189 financial services leaders, N=178 healthcare leaders, N=155 technology leaders, N=206 industrial leaders, N=94 professional services leaders, N=60 non-profit leaders

Strategy, technology, and go-to-market functions are most likely to have implemented generative AI, while finance and HR lag behind

From a functional perspective, strategy/R&D/innovation leaders are farthest along in their GenAI implementation journey, with over half reporting that they’re piloting (38%) or have fully implemented (10%) the technology in their day-to-day workflow (Figure 5).

Tech, data, and digital leaders, as well as marketing, sales, PR, and communications leaders have also made significant moves, with 41% and 42% reporting that they’re piloting or have fully implemented GenAI.

Leaders in finance and HR and Inclusive functions were the least likely to report that their teams had taken steps to implement the technology, with 45% and 38% saying they’ve taken no action. Given the risks these leaders have to contend with, these gaps make sense. For example, HR leaders who are handling employee data need to be thoughtful around issues of equity and privacy before engaging with AI.

Figure 5: % of leaders who have taken at least one action towards implementing generative AI by function

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,029 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders

Leaders in the Americas are slightly more likely to have taken action on GenAI

Nearly three-quarters (72%) of leaders in the Americas have taken steps towards implementing GenAI. European leaders are a close second, at 70%. Leaders in Asia aren’t far behind, with 65% agreeing that they’ve taken at least one development action (Figure 6). From a maturity perspective, the regions are fairly balanced in their implementation progress, with a quarter of leaders in the Americas and Europe and 30% of leaders in Asia reporting having piloted or fully implemented GenAI.

Figure 6: % of leaders who have taken at least one action towards implementing generative AI by region

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N=531 Americas leaders, N=441 Europe leaders, N=61 Asia leaders

Only

32%

of leaders are confident that they have the right skills to implement AI in their organizations

Barriers to GenAI implementation

Given the technology’s relative newness, GenAI’s current adoption rate is astounding. However, while 71% of leaders have taken steps to bring the technology into their team’s workflow, we found that only 32% are confident in their own skills around said implementation.

This is compounded by the fact that 55% of leaders name “knowledge and expertise” as a barrier to implementing GenAI, making it our most selected concern.

Figure 7: Top barriers for leaders implementing generative AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 1,287 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders, and board directors

What’s next for leaders developing GenAI implementation strategies?

"GenAI and foundational models won’t change what makes leaders great. They will still be required to set organizational strategy, motivate their teams, deliver results, and build deep relationships. AI will help differentiate leaders in more nuanced ways, enabling those who add AI technologies to their toolsets to act faster and more strategically. To get there, they need to be more ambitious, learning oriented, and open to experimentation."

– Fawad Bajwa, Russell Reynolds Associates

Regardless of where you are in your GenAI journey, it’s clear that we’re at an inflection point. Despite some significant gaps, the speed with which organizations have moved to implement GenAI speaks to the pervasiveness of this new technology. While there is no way to currently predict what AI’s long term implications for the workforce will be, understanding the steps organizations have taken today helps leaders better plan for the world of tomorrow.

To seize these opportunities, we identified five key areas to help CEOs, boards, and senior technology leaders navigate GenAI’s impact on their organizations, as well as questions they can use to structure conversations around their implementation strategy.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.

Jemi Crookes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. She is based in Washington D.C.

Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.

George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.

Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in London.

Tuck Rickards is a senior member and former leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in San Francisco.

The authors wish to thank the 2,500+ leaders from RRA’s global network who completed the 2023 Global Leadership Monitor Fall Pulse. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2024 and beyond.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices