The Unspoken Friction Between CMOs and Their Peers | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Unspoken Friction Between CMOs and Their Peers

Chief Executive OfficersCustomer Activation and GrowthC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Article

Greg Hodge

September 27, 2023

4 min

Chief Executive OfficersCustomer Activation and GrowthC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsExecutive SearchTeam Performance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The CMO role has been caricatured as a revolving door. How can marketers—and their CEOs—combat this?

Close

Greg Hodge

London

In late July, a cartoon by Tom Fishburne, creator of Marketoonist, made the rounds on LinkedIn, portraying the chief marketing officer (CMO) role as a revolving door. The cartoon struck a nerve—both for marketers and the rest of the C-Suite—and was met with a lot of finger pointing. The marketing community’s general response could be characterized as: “It’s not me, it’s them.”

This is not without good reason. When hiring for marketing roles, Russell Reynolds Associates regularly hears clients asking for short-term results, quick fixes, and “do more with less.” Not an easy task for the marketer. What’s more, over the past 10 years, the CMO role has undergone a profound shift in the ever-evolving marketing landscape. Traditionally seen as brand custodians and communication strategists, CMOs have evolved into vital drivers of innovation, customer experience, and data-driven decision-makers. This transformation is underpinned by the rise of digital marketing and advanced analytics, which have fundamentally altered the way companies interact with consumers.

Simultaneously, CMOs are contending with their well-documented reputation of being “job hoppers,” which is often attributed to an inability to demonstrate marketing’s value and return on investment (ROI).  That said, CMOs’ historically short tenures require deeper analysis than the stereotype allows for. Everyone—including CEOs and the marketers themselves—is responsible for this phenomenon.

CMOs and the Executive Leadership Team

The relationship between CMOs and the rest of the executive leadership team (ELT) can be complicated. It’s common for marketing to be excluded from the executive table or from reporting to the CEO. At our recent industry event, Why CMOs Need to be Married to Tech, we heard that marketing is often viewed as an intangible function; as a result, ownership typically isn’t shared between marketing and other functions.

Especially in a difficult macro-economic environment, this can cause tension between leaders. When accountability isn’t clear or metrics aren’t shared, finger pointing often increases. Russell Reynolds’ Leadership Confidence Index found that leaders are losing confidence in their executive team’s ability to lead. With leaders facing several interconnected and competing issues, our Leadership Confidence Index provides a line of sight into the overall health and resilience of executive leadership teams. CMOs often leave their position to take on similar (or bigger) roles at other companies. However, we need to consider another possible reason for this departure: how go-to-market leaders view their peers and how that impacts their motivation to stay at an organization.

Declining confidence across the ELT—especially for go-to-market leaders

Overall, confidence in executive teams has trended downwards since early 2021, falling 4.2 points over two years (Figure 1). However, among go-to-market leaders—which includes CMOs—we see that confidence in their ELT's effectiveness is much lower than average leader perceptions (57.2 vs. 64.8), and even lower than the CEO’s (65.6).

Figure 1: YoY Leadership confidence index by role (H1 2021 to H1 2023)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor | Base: CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and board directors – H1 2021 (n=1472), H1 2022 (n=1307), H2 2022 (n=1450), H1 2023 (n=1262) | Base: CEOs – H1 2021 (n=194), H1 2022 (n=178), H2 2022 (n=263), H1 2023 (n=229) |  Base: GTM Leaders - H1 2021 (n=47*), H1 2022 (n=36*), H2 2022 (n=57), H1 2023 (n=40) |Note: *small base size:  **extremely small base| Note: ^GTM  consists of Chief Customer/Marketing/Revenue/Sales/Strategy Officers

Go-to-market leaders’ lack of confidence is likely the result of the disconnect and dysfunction between CMOs and the rest of the C-suite. Any leader who doesn’t feel appreciated or empowered isn’t likely to be confident in their organization’s leadership, or stick around the organization itself. CMOs are tasked with impossibly contradictory responsibilities (be left and right brained; manage all customer touchpoints; use data & analytics to back up every decision). The modern CMO's success lies in their ability to adapt swiftly, stay ahead of emerging trends, and lead with creativity and data-backed strategies to ensure their company's continued growth and relevance in a competitive market. If you combine these contradictions with negative pre-existing tenure expectations from the CEO, the marketer isn’t set up for success.

What can CMOs do to fix this?

The modern CMO plays a pivotal role in aligning marketing efforts with overall business objectives, while also fostering collaboration between departments and driving a customer-centric initiatives within the organization. These responsibilities, especially when paired with having to fight against negative preconceptions, have impacted CMO’s confidence in their peer’s capabilities, behaviors, and issue management skills. So what can marketers do to improve their relationships with their peers?

Use your core skills

Storytelling comes natural to marketers. Use that ability internally to help the ELT understand the consumer and paint a vision of what is possible.

Use inclusive language

While customer lifetime value and cost of acquisition are important metrics, often marketers lose the room by talking in acronyms. Using simplified, inclusive language will enhance ELT relationships.

Overcommunicate to collaborate

Immediately involving others in the strategy not only provides space for the whole ELT to share valuable perspectives, but also gives a sense of ownership for a shared vision.

How do CEOs stop the CMO revolving door?

It takes two to tango. To lengthen CMO tenures, the CEO needs to ensure they’re properly supported. Marketing goals must align with the overall company strategy; thus, the CEO and CMO need to be on the same page about the company’s long-term vision, objectives, and priorities to develop marketing strategies that help achieve these goals. Once CMOs have the seat at the table, a few other things can be done to boost collaboration:

Be a matchmaker

Ensure strong collaboration with other C-Suite members, such as the CFO and CIO. This collaboration ensures that marketing efforts are integrated with other business functions and contribute to the long term strategic goals.

Budget realistically

In 2023, according to Gartner, 75% of CMOs were asked to do more with less budget. While everyone has to make adjustments in the face of difficult market conditions, ensure that your CMO has enough financial support to execute marketing campaigns, research, and initiatives effectively--even if you're asking them to do it with less.

Recognition

The CEO should acknowledge the marketing department’s achievements and contributions to the company's success. Recognizing efforts boosts morale and will motivate the CMO and their team to continue delivering outstanding results.

Authors

Greg Hodge leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Customer, Activation & Growth capability in EMEA. He is based in London.

Antoinetta Canada leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Customer, Activation & Growth Knowledge team. She is based in Chicago.

The Unspoken Friction Between CMOs and Their Peers

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices