More Women Take CEO Jobs But Parity Still Decades Away  | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

More Women Take CEO Jobs But Parity Still Decades Away

Chief Executive OfficersCEO Succession

Article

Luke Meynell

October 20, 2023

3 min

Chief Executive OfficersCEO Succession

Executive Summary

Despite record CEO turnover and more women becoming CEO than ever before, progress toward gender parity is too slow.

Close

Luke Meynell

London

Our analysis of the 1,822 companies listed on the world’s leading stock indices reveals 142 CEOs left their positions so far this year. This compares to 148 across the same period in 2022, which was a record year for CEO turnover.

This high level of departures should be creating an opportunity to accelerate progress on gender parity among CEOs—and it is, to an extent. In 2023 so far, 15% (on average) of those taking a CEO role have been women. This is up 9.7% across the same period in 2018.

This picture varies around the world:

The proportion of women CEOs appointed in Q3 2023

20% ( 2 )

S&P 500

25% ( 1 )

ASX 200

0% ( 0 )

FTSE 100

Women are still vastly underrepresented in the top job:

Women CEOs in the major global indexes

42

S&P 500

10

FTSE 100

1

Nikkei

While it’s positive to see the corporate world making some progress toward gender parity in CEO roles, it’s happening far too slowly. At the current rate of change, the world’s leading stock indices won’t see the same number of men and women in CEO seats until the next century.

The CEO gender tenure gap

Our research also shows that not only are fewer women being appointed to CEO, but their time in the role is much shorter than their male counterparts. Women’s tenure is on average 5.2 years, compared with 8.1 years for men. Interestingly, the size of this gap varies across the globe.

A closer look at the CEO gender tenure gap around the world

Only in the NSE Nifty 50 do women CEOs stay in the role longer than men.

CAC 40
-7.7-year difference

S&P 500
-3.6-year difference

FTSE 100
-0.3-year difference

NSE Nifty 50
+1.7-year difference

There are a number of reasons why women may be leaving these roles sooner than men. Factors such as gender-bias, discrimination and workplace support and culture all play a part. Women leaders may also be more inclined to leave the organization in search of better positions and opportunities, with CEO to chair and Board roles becoming increasingly popular pathways.

If the tenure gap between men and women persists, it will potentially make it harder for industries to reach gender parity, suggesting more needs to be done to not only appoint women into the top seat but retain them.

Factors contributing to high CEO turnover

From COVID-19 to wars and economic uncertainly, businesses have faced unprecedented challenges in recent years. And the pressure has been on CEOs to steer their organizations through it.

CEOs, who were planning to step down earlier, may now feel that they can do so without risking further turmoil for their organizations. While others are ready for new opportunities after navigating such a difficult period.

Boards are also increasingly looking for fresh leadership. Many are now in a position to re-examine their strategic goals—and question whether or not they have the right CEO in place to address them.

As higher levels of volatility and uncertainty in G7 economies persist, we expect annual CEO turnover to remain high in the years to come. This potentially opens the door to a greater number of women candidates and could help accelerate the world toward more equal gender representation in senior leadership.

What does this mean for companies?

When a CEO leaves, it can disrupt operations and create uncertainty for employees and investors. In light of these trends, it will become increasingly important for companies to prepare for CEO turnover and have the succession plans in place to ensure a smooth transition.

A CEO succession plan should identify which of the organization’s current leaders have the potential to become CEO and what support and development is required to prepare them for the role.

While CEO turnover presents a challenge for companies, it’s also an opportunity. When a CEO leaves, the company is in a better position to reset and reevaluate its longer-term position. It can then identify and appoint the best leadership to deliver the next phase of its evolution. Companies that manage CEO turnover effectively are likely to emerge stronger than ever.

Explore the full CEO turnover data

Board and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersBoard EffectivenessCEO Succession

The New CEO Progression Blueprint: Expanding CEO Succession Optionality During Uncertain Times

Board and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO Succession

How The Story Gets Told: Do LLMs Produce Biased Statements About CEOs?

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices