Treasury Management, Data Acumen, Deeper Relationships: Commercial Banking’s Emerging Talent Landscape | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Treasury Management, Data Acumen, Deeper Relationships: Commercial Banking’s Emerging Talent Landscape

Transformation and InnovationConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

Robert Voth

August 19, 2024

5 min

Transformation and InnovationConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Commercial banks must adjust their human capital strategies - act now to gain momentum, talent, and trust for long-term success.

Close

Robert Voth

Chicago

Over the last 15 years, commercial banking has undergone three generational challenges – the 2008 banking crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic, and recent unprecedented interest rates. While short-term issues were initially dealt with, their cumulative impacts are now being felt across the industry.

On the journey to regain public and regulatory confidence, banks concentrated on transforming core relationships with a renewed focus on credibility, insight, and trust. This, combined with the maturity of omni-channel products and delivery channels, led to a new wave of client expectations that redefined personal touch, speed, and efficiency. Bankers reacted by establishing new levels of connectivity, brand presence, and foundational relationships.

That’s easier said than done – our recent Global Leadership Monitor revealed that, while 62% of consumer & commercial banking leaders note the “availability of key talent/skills” as a major factor impacting their organization’s health (making this a top choice for banking leaders), only 39% of these leaders reported feeling prepared to address these talent challenges.

To start addressing this gap, commercial banking leaders should prioritize the following:

Treasury management capabilities

Using data-driven solutions to create stickier relationships

Investing in total talent transformation

“It’s easy for deposits to leave the bank, but when we develop deep offerings that truly affect day-to-day operations, it provides a level of stickiness that strengthens our position.”

Treasury management capabilities

Treasury management is a crucial differentiator for commercial banks. Clients who have integrated a seamless go-to-market capability with treasury management have seen benefits like deeper market penetration and competitive retention advantages.

In a recent discussion regarding the aftermath of Silicon Valley Bank’s collapse, a commercial bank president at a top 20 U.S. bank attributed their organization’s 90%+ client retention to the embedded and deep connectivity brought by coupling commercial products with treasury management capabilities.

Commercial bankers must reach far beyond deposits and loans with lifetime value-additive offerings that enable efficiency—even as this higher level of service challenges some leaders.

Using data-driven solutions to create stickier relationships

Relationships and market connectivity remain foundational to commercial bankers’ success. However, shifts in market dynamics and a generation of retiring veteran bankers have led a handful of innovative banks to rethink which competencies the next generation needs to be successful.

As clients begin working with new entrants—like FinTechs and more innovative banks—that provide frictionless digital experiences, integrated services, innovative offerings, and efficient processes, traditional commercial banks have come under pressure. We’ve observed a subset of veteran commercial bankers who have not been able to keep pace with these new competitors, furthering shifting the industry away from a singular banking relationship.

In fact, in a 2023 Deloitte survey, one-third of executives at companies with $1 billion+ in annual revenue indicated their company had a banking relationship with 10 or more institutions. This diversification underscores the competitive landscape; to be the best, companies must drive treasury management with a tech-forward mindset to offer data-driven, tailored solutions to ensure lasting relationships.

Now more than ever, commercial banking leaders need a sophisticated blend of data-driven insights to deliver a specialized, nuanced perspective on the evolving market. Bankers need to feel comfortable leading proactive discussions around future products and solutions, outlining consultative visions informed by data, thereby strengthening client trust and elevating value.

Investing in total talent transformation

Banks willing to invest in transformational talent and state-of-the-art data analysis capabilities will be empowered to reshape their product development, distribution, and client service strategies, introducing new solutions where speed and service quality are commonplace.

By developing data-driven core competencies and differentiated leadership experiences that inform enterprise-wide solutions, the next generation of commercial banking leaders can drive this change.  As banks digitize manual operations, these leaders can reallocate more of their time and energy into solving long-term, strategic issues. This will allow them to lead as holistic activators—harnessing and synchronizing the power of the entire bank for all clients, establishing a deeper networks of clients, contacts, and colleagues.

Additionally, exceptional communication will be key to the future of commercial banking. In the study noted above, Deloitte found 73% of commercial clients selected “being proactive in anticipating our needs and communications” as the most important attribute in a trusted bank relationship. By creating talent development programs that deliver insights through a differentiated product approach, banks will help the next generation of leaders establish relationships and trust with their clients, oriented around long-term value.

Why Banks Need to Act Now

At a time when cost-cutting activities are clouding the right strategic moves on talent, banks must look beyond the short-term and begin planning for the next generation of talent. Waiting for economic and emotional tides to turn only allow others to gain momentum, talent, and trust. And without the right leaders in place, a banks’ competitive edge never actualizes.

By prioritizing treasury management capabilities, data-driven relational insights, deep client relationships, and investing heavily in talent, commercial banks can begin preparing their leaders of the future, aligning executive recruitment, retention, and compensation schemes towards a new definition of long-term success.

Authors

Brandon Frohnapple is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer & Commercial Financial Services Practice. He is based in Chicago.
Robert Voth co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer & Commercial Financial Services Practice. He is based in Chicago.
James Baek is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services Knowledge team. He is based in New York.

Sources

H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, Russell Reynolds Associates, n = 124 consumer & commercial banking

Deloitte Commercial Banking 2025: Finding a New Compass to Navigate the Future, Deloitte, 2023.

“What Today’s Rainmakers Do Differently,” Matthew Dixon, Ted McKenna, Rory Channer, and Karen Freeman, Harvard Business Review, 2023.

Treasury Management, Data Acumen, Deeper Relationships: Commercial Banking’s Emerging Talent Landscape

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices