15 Signs Your CEO is Underperforming (And What To Do About It) | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

15 Signs Your CEO is Underperforming (And What To Do About It)

SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

August 14, 2024

5 min

SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SEARCH

To assist boards in recognizing and navigating decision-making around CEO underperformance, RRA developed a list of 15 triggers.

Close

David Krahe

Dallas

Margot McShane

San Francisco

Scott E Smith

Dallas

CEO succession is one of the board’s most critical—and complex—responsibilities. But according to our Global Leadership Monitor, only 52% of board directors are confident in their ability to design a successful strategy for leadership succession at the C-level. Making the right decision in a timely manner can transform a business, while the wrong decision can result in a leader who is ill-suited for the company's culture and strategic priorities. Moreover, research from Harvard Business Review shows that CEO underperformance decreases total shareholder return, with underperforming CEO appointments in the S&P 1500 alone costing investors upwards of $291 billion every year.

When a board begins to sense that their CEO is underperforming, it’s crucial to mitigate risks associated with CEO transitions and position the organization for continued success as soon as possible. However, sensing underperformance can be delicate and challenging, given indicators are often initially nuanced before they require urgent action.

To assist boards in recognizing and navigating this sensitive situation, Russell Reynolds Associates developed a list of fifteen triggers to serve as indicators of and guide decision-making around CEO underperformance.

The following five  critical triggers provide insights into when the board should take urgent action:

01 Consistent poor financial performance

Prolonged failure to meet financial targets, persistent losses, or a decline in shareholder value.

02 Market share erosion

A continuous decline in the company's market share without a viable strategy for recovery.

03 Ethical or legal issues

Discovery of ethical breaches, legal violations, or conduct inconsistent with the organization's values and standards.

04 Failure to achieve strategic goals

Inability to implement or achieve strategic objectives set by the board, consistently falling short of organizational goals.

05 Inability to adapt to market changes

Failure to adapt to changing market conditions, technological advancements, or industry shifts, resulting in a loss of competitiveness.

Additionally, these ten more nuanced leading indicators of underperformance signal the need for change in the future:

06 Lack of accountability

Demonstrated lack of accountability for mistakes or poor performance, or a refusal to take responsibility for the organization's challenges.

07 Ineffectiveness in crisis management

Inability to navigate and manage crises effectively, leading to further harm to the company's reputation and stability.

08 Deteriorating company culture

Erosion of organizational culture, declining employee morale, or a toxic work environment attributed to the CEO's leadership.

09 Loss of confidence from key stakeholders

Stakeholders beyond the board—including leadership team members, investors, customers, external stakeholders, and/or partners—lose confidence in the CEO's ability to lead effectively.

10 Persistent communication issues

Ongoing problems with communication, transparency, or the CEO's inability to effectively convey the company's vision and strategy internally or externally.

11 Strained board-CEO relationship

Breakdown in the relationship between the CEO and the board, hindering effective governance and decision-making.

12 Loss or potential loss of key talent

Significant loss or risk of losing key executives or talent (regrettable attrition) due to dissatisfaction with the CEO's leadership.

13 Continued decline despite intervention

Board interventions, support, or resource provision fail to improve the CEO's performance.

14 Repeated failure to address feedback

Consistent receipt of performance-related feedback without taking corrective actions or showing responsiveness to constructive feedback.

15 Mismatch with current organizational stage

Misalignment between the CEO's experience, qualifications, and leadership style and the next phase of the organization.

We recognize that these points may feel like common wisdom to many directors. Yet more often than not, CEO underperformance is not addressed or addressed too late.

A variety of factors hold board directors back from removing a CEO: the fear that change will cause more disruption; not wanting to be an outlier or viewed as overly critical; a lack of objectivity; insufficient channels that support having these dialogs; the tension between being an effective director who supports the CEO and bringing topics of concern to the forefront; and the desire to show trust in the organization and its future success, to name a few.

However, ensuring the right person is at the helm is one of the most crucial parts of a boards’ mandate. This requires an effective board culture that allows for constructive feedback, with mechanisms and communication outlets in place to support these conversations at the right time and place.

When CEO underperformance creates a crisis or emergency succession scenario, boards must identify viable internal successors and potential interim successors. If no immediate candidates are available, the board should consider who among its members could step in. Having a well-prepared plan is not only essential, but table stakes as a responsible board when embarking on this path.

When considering a less urgent change, the board should identify and cultivate internal successors and conduct continuous confidential strategic profiling of the relevant external CEO candidate pool in addition to the above. It is best practice to benchmark the internal candidates against the current external talent pool to determine if an external search is needed, and always keep the list of external candidates updated while you are developing your internal candidates.

Going forward, ensure that the organization has a culture of disciplined, ongoing CEO evaluation and development. Regularly evaluating the CEO and leveraging annual reviews to reflect on and update the role’s forward-looking success profile helps the board proactively bring objectivity and structure to the conversation. It allows boards to focus on development and future needs of the organization while taking note of potential underperformance and begin planning for new leadership when necessary.

No board wants to find themselves addressing CEO underperformance. Our hope is that this checklist can be used as a guide to the necessary conversations that have to happen when this unfortunate situation arises. As the number of triggers indicating the need for change increases, boards can feel confident in the necessity of addressing CEO underperformance and preparing the organization for ongoing success.

Authors

David Krahe leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Medical Devices and Diagnostics practice. He is based in Dallas.
Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory practice in the Americas. She is based in San Francisco.
Scott Smith is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment, Culture and Development capability. He is based in Dallas.
Sarah Flören leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare Knowledge team. She is based in Amsterdam.

15 Signs Your CEO is Underperforming (And What To Do About It)

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices