Navigating Global Shifts: The Increasingly Important Role of Government Affairs Leaders | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Navigating Global Shifts: The Increasingly Important Role of Government Affairs Leaders

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceCorporate Affairs and Communications OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersExecutive Search

Article

June 10, 2024

4 min

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceCorporate Affairs and Communications OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersExecutive Search

Executive Summary

How are government affairs leaders navigating a complex geopolitical environment? Our research delves further into their approach.

Close

TR Straub

Washington DC

Marionne Barge-van Engelen

Brussels

Daria Rokk

Hong Kong

The turbulence of the last four years has reshaped the geopolitical landscape, and 2024’s resulting multipolar geopolitical environment has made risk management a non-negotiable. This, in turn, has reinforced organizations’ need for a truly strategic government affairs function. Our current environment is one in which truly adept government affairs leaders thrive, while those who have struggled to evolve fall further behind.

To provide insights for leaders aiming to navigate these risks and build out effective teams, Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed 55 government affairs leaders and conducted 15 interviews across industries and geographies, capturing these leaders’ shifting perspectives on the geopolitical landscape, how their teams and organizations are adapting, and what this means for future government affairs talent.

Government affairs leaders’ perspectives on geopolitical risks are changing: While requiring a measured approach, government affairs leaders recognize the strategic importance of being proactive on global issues and their implications on business operations when developing business strategy and resource deployment.

To address these changing risks, organizations are focusing on strengthening business & functional leader engagement, analytics, and cultivating external relationships: The dynamic geopolitical landscape is forcing organizations to re-evaluate how they operate and strategize. As companies strive to stay ahead of rapid geopolitical changes, the ability to pivot quickly and effectively is no longer optional but a strategic necessity – forcing teams to make hard decisions in terms of prioritization and resource deployment.

Future government affairs talent needs to be strategic, resilient, and adaptable: As the current government affairs leaders look to build out a future-fit team for our current political moment, they emphasize the urgency of talent that can adapt to legislative and regulatory dynamics quickly and utilize digital tools & platforms for maximizing proactivity and execution.

The changing external environment: What geopolitical risks are government affairs leaders most concerned about?

In late 2023, JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon said, “This may be the most dangerous time the world has seen in decades.”  And in fact, our Global Leadership Monitor found that less than one in three leaders feel prepared to address geopolitical uncertainty, making this the challenge that leaders globally feel least prepared to address.

Figure 1: % of leaders answering, “Which of the following political risks do you believe will impact your organization in the next 3 years?”

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Global Government Affairs Survey; N=55 GA Leaders

More specifically, government affairs leaders report that fast-evolving regulatory developments, armed conflict and increasingly tense political rivalries, cyber threats & data privacy issues, economic recessions & depressions, cross-border regulations, and trade conflicts will have the largest impacts on their organizations in the next 3 years (Figure 1).

These concerns reflect the intricate and often multipolar regulatory landscape. As innovations like AI make laws and regulations increasingly complex, globally-intertwined armed conflicts become more prevalent, and issues such as economic recessions, cyber threats, cross-border regulations, and trade conflicts grow more nuanced and multifaceted, government affairs leaders require sharper decision-making skills in the face of ambiguity, as well as a swift crisis response capability. To formulate a sophisticated, well-informed, and fast response, they need a proactive strategic approach, the right team around them, and dedicated resources, focus, and engagement from across their organizations. This also involves weighing both near-term political and on-the-ground economic considerations alongside the longer-term “domino effect” that geopolitical events can cascade around the globe.

Building on this, the path to effectively mitigating these geopolitical risks is fraught with capability gaps and resource limitations. Our survey surfaced that many leaders feel ill-equipped to navigate the increasingly complex geopolitical landscape from both a skills and resources perspective. This highlights a critical disconnect between the strategic responses needed to effectively mitigate geopolitical threats and current operational capabilities. To address this gap, government affairs leaders need to evaluate the strengths, impact, and efficiency of their organizations, and develop the necessary talent.

Managing political risks effectively often involves financial resources and connections. Without a robust budget or established networks, it can be challenging to access the necessary resources to address potential risks.”

To address these geopolitical risks, organizations are  focusing on business function engagement, analytics, and cultivating external relationships

In response to the rapidly evolving geopolitical landscape and increasing societal demands, government affairs leaders report making key strategic and operational shifts to better serve their organizations. These include:

Strengthening business and functional group coordination throughout their organization.

Cementing and mobilizing external network relations, including with third party advocacy groups.

Utilizing data and analytics to inform real-time policy implications and solution implementation.

Organizing operations to enhance cross-functional collaboration, strategically integrating across various departments.

Upskilling teams to be more versatile and better positioned in government affairs-adjacent functions.

Government affairs leaders have increasingly noted the importance of proactive and agile responses to existing and emerging geopolitical threats alike. With that, it should come as no surprise that government affairs leaders are deeply focused on communication across the organization – quickly bringing key geopolitical forecasting, risks, and opportunities to the C-suite and board’s attention.

To achieve this, government affairs leaders need to stay close to those making strategic decisions, broadening communication channels to their board and C-suite to keep senior leaders abreast on rapidly evolving issues, including advising on a range of scenarios, shifting circumstances, and resulting business implications. While communication is vastly important, it is equally as important to understand who should be communicated with and in what matter, being careful not to ignore constituencies.

I’ve emphasized real-time risk assessment and proactive engagement, moving our strategy from reactive to anticipatory. This shift is critical in navigating the complexities of today’s global political climate and ensuring our organization remains agile and informed.”

Many of our respondents also noted that there has been a large improvement in the communications and information sharing between key stakeholders and the broader organization. These communication improvements suggest that leaders beyond government affairs are recognizing the function’s importance – perhaps due to our current complex political moment – and the need for strategic political advice on these important topics. However, this trend isn’t universal, as some leaders noted a decrease in the overall quality of communication between HR, Marketing, and IT; given the employee and customer implications of geopolitics, and the increased reliance on data and analytics, reinforcing these relationships may need to be reprioritized (Figure 2).

Figure 2: % of Leaders answering: “How has the quality of your interactions with your internal stakeholders changed over the last three years?”

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Global Government Affairs Survey; N=55 GA Leaders

With over half the world heading to the polls this year, 2024 is rife with uncertainty surrounding administrative turnovers and their policy implications. This has government affairs leaders holding off on making substantial investments in their organizations and teams, as this uncertainty around policy and legal framework implications makes it challenging for  executives to make shorter-term decisions and continue focusing on the broader business operations. While government affairs leaders may not always have the ear of their executives, they’ve found success when engaging with the board on long-term planning initiatives.

With the number of elections happening globally, executives are playing a lot of catch-up and trying to avoid lopsided strategy and planning efforts. I’ve had a much easier time engaging on these issues with the board. They turn into engaged, energizing discussions – and they are appreciative of the discussion.”

As the stakes for government affairs leaders grow higher and more visible, these actions and communications reflect a deeper integration of risk management into strategic planning, an increased focus on direct advocacy and stakeholder management, and a heightened emphasis on responsiveness to emerging global issues at their core.

We brought our government relations team closer together to maximize collaboration on high-intensity issues—especially the most politically sensitive items—using working groups, task forces, etc. We also drastically increased the flow of information to senior company leadership to make them more quickly aware of contentious issues and their impact.”

Building a strategic, resilient, and adaptable government affairs team

To grapple with our rapidly changing geopolitical environment and the subsequent organizational changes they require, government affairs leaders need strong teams around them. Now more than ever, these leaders are expected to be business and organizational strategists first, and advocacy experts second. While functional expertise remains critical, government affairs leaders are now prioritizing business and political acumen, as well as policy insights and people leadership as paramount to success in the role (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Leaders ranking the qualities most critical to success for government affairs leaders

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Global Government Affairs Survey; N=55 GA Leaders

As government affairs leaders look to hire and develop successful teams, the following should be top of mind

Strategic business & commercial acumen: As they operate across the C-suite and counsel the board, government affairs leaders must demonstrate their abilities as trusted business partners, not just policy navigators and political operators. While transitioning from government, consulting, or NGOs is possible, experience within similarly-complex corporate settings, operating in support of commercial objectives, is typically ideal; there is less room for a learning curve atop this function. In support of this, government affairs leaders must demonstrate proficiency in strategic planning, analytical thinking, and conceptual skills, enabling the identification and mitigation of risks, while anticipating potential business opportunities.

Commercial acumen, a real world understanding of how business works, and the ability to translate policy to business is an immense talent gap for us.”

Expertise in navigating political terrain: Sharp political and lobbying acumen is crucial. This critical skill involves more than just understanding legislative processes; it requires the ability to effectively navigate the intricate web of political relationships and influence. Leaders and their teams with this acumen are adept at shaping policy outcomes and advancing organizational interests in complex regulatory environments. They excel in crafting persuasive arguments, building strategic alliances, and engaging with key policy makers to advocate for favourable legislative and regulatory conditions. Thus, government affairs leaders and their teams must not only keep their fingers on the political pulse, but also proactively leverage their insights to steer their organizations through political change and uncertainties.

In addition to having a strong understanding of the inner workings of government, individuals on a government affairs team must also have a keen political sense. They need to be able to anticipate potential shifts in policy and navigate the political landscape to advance their organization's interests effectively.”

Integrated public policy insights: Proficiency in both micro and macro-level thinking is key, as is a demonstrated understanding of the interplay of business, policy, and social issues on a global scale. This requires an academic and practical grasp of relevant public policy and geopolitical trends, along with recognition of various influencers – ranging from NGOs to government bodies. Substantive insights are crucial, but far less helpful if considered in a vacuum. Individuals should possess the ability to break down silos and complex issues and approach them through a modular lens, solving each component in a way that lends its successes to the next.

People-centered leadership: Effective leadership transcends traditional team management, requiring a clear vision and ability to galvanize diverse groups around shared goals. Whether overseeing direct teams or guiding broader organizational efforts, these leaders should excel in harnessing and deploying resources strategically, even in resource-constrained environments. Leaders who bring experience in designing structures, building complementary teams, and leveraging collective expertise are increasingly important – as is the need to work across time zones and cultures. This global fluency enhances their capacity to foster a cohesive and inclusive working environment that drives innovation and effective execution of government affairs objectives.

It is important to find a person who aligns with our corporate culture, bringing strong judgement and a team mindset.”

Diplomacy and strategic communication skills: In an era defined by rapid changes, the importance of diplomatic and strategic communication skills for government affairs leaders cannot be overstated. Leaders who are well-versed in these skills are instrumental in preemptively navigating the tumultuous waters of international policy, corporate governance, and risk mitigation. By articulating clear, compelling narratives and engaging effectively across diverse landscapes, they build and maintain crucial alliances. As a result, these leaders not only ensure that the organization has strong internal and external networks – underpinned by clear articulation of goals across the board – but also act as an extension of the organization’s overall reputation.

The ability to boil down complex issues and communicate impactfully to company leaders and our most senior external stakeholders is one of the most difficult skills to find for our team.”

In today’s turbulent global environment, where stakes and performance expectations are higher than ever, government affairs leadership has never been so important.

Our research underscores that government affairs leaders must assess and ensure their teams possess the capabilities to influence strategic discussions and navigate extreme change. As current challenges evolve and new ones emerge, government affairs leaders must feel confident that their organization’s operations and talent are conducive to a proactive and strategic environment – not just to manage disruptions, but to proactively shape opportunities and ensure that the organization thrives in the face of strenuous political challenges. This era demands more than ever from government affairs leaders, making the role pivotal in future-proofing organizations and creating long-lasting strategic change.

Methodology

The analysis in this piece is based on a survey conducted from January 1 to April 15th and includes 55 global government affairs leaders. We have also drawn on previous survey responses from our previous  Government Affairs survey, as well as our experience of running hundreds of global government affairs searches.

Additionally, we conducted 15 qualitative interviews to better understand our respondents’ views and perspectives on key areas of focus.

Authors

T.R Straub is a senior member of the Global Legal, Risk, & Compliance Officers capability and co-leads the Government Affairs Practice. He is based in Washington, DC.

Marionne Barge is a senior member of the Global Legal, Risk, & Compliance Officers capability and co-leads the Government Affairs Practice. She is based in Brussels.

Daria Rokk leads the Legal, Risk, & Compliance Officers capability in Asia and co-leads the Government Affairs Practice. She is based in Hong Kong.

Alison Huntington leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds’ Global Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers and Human Resources Officers capabilities. She is based in London.

Jason Kipkala is the Commercial Operations Leader for Russell Reynolds’ Global Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers and Human Resources Officers capabilities. He is based in Toronto.

Navigating Global Shifts

The Increasingly Important Role of Government Affairs Leaders

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices