DACH Portfolio Company CFO Perspectives on Collaborating with PE Investors | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

DACH Portfolio Company CFO Perspectives on Collaborating with PE Investors

Financial ServicesFinance Officers

Article

December 12, 2023

3 min

Financial ServicesFinance Officers

Executive Summary

Russell Reynolds Associates conducted interviews with over 15 CFOs from portfolio companies to explore the dynamics of collaboration between CFOs and investors.

Close

Nadine Mensdorf

Frankfurt

Daniela Nienstedt

Frankfurt

Introduction

Russell Reynolds Associates (RRA) interviewed more than 15 current portfolio company CFOs to gain a deeper understanding of how CFOs and investors work together. The interviews focused on three topics: collaboration, communication, and level of involvement. This article presents key findings from the interviews, shedding light on the nature, speed, and differences in collaboration among different types of investors.

Findings

Collaboration with investors is fast, direct, and result-oriented

CFOs emphasized the high velocity of collaboration with investors. Collaboration tends to be fast, direct, and frequent, driven by a focus on performance and supported by data and facts. CFOs also highlighted the importance of the value creation plan, which is usually created for each portfolio company and tracked diligently by all parties involved.

Transparency and responsiveness are key

Transparent business reporting was mentioned as a top priority by all CFOs whom we interviewed. They stressed the importance of providing clear and comprehensive information to investors. Additionally, nearly 85% of CFOs mentioned that responding rapidly to investors is of high importance.

Collaboration varies depending on the ownership structure

Our interviews explored differences in collaboration when working in PE-backed companies, listed companies, and family-owned companies. CFOs described working in PE-backed companies as demanding, hands-on, and pragmatic, with a strong sense of urgency. On the other hand, when working in listed companies, the focus tends to be on quarterly results, with more oversight of legal and compliance matters. When working in family-owned companies, the focus is on having a strategy that prioritizes longer-term performance. When two types of shareholders are involved (e.g., PE and family), then collaboration becomes even more challenging.

Performance reporting is rigorous and frequent

CFOs cited regular communication with investors as crucial, with monthly meetings involving detailed reporting packages being the most common approach. In PE contexts, there is a strong emphasis on various financial key performance indicators (KPIs), with particular importance attributed to EBITDA. Feedback from investors was described as frequent, direct, and non-political, fostering an open and transparent dialogue.

Communication and collaboration is influenced by fund size

The size of the investor influences communication and collaboration dynamics. Large-cap investors tend to maintain a more distant relationship with their portfolio companies, focusing on structured processes and displaying less involvement. In contrast, small- and mid-cap investors were described as more hands-on, operational, and detail-driven.

International funds collaborate at an even faster pace

CFOs noted differences in interactions with domestic and international funds. The latter often have a greater financial focus, but less understanding of the German context. Even though German funds are extremely fast-paced, international funds were perceived as even more pragmatic and faster in their decision-making, with more back-office support.

Standardized reporting and regular meetings are valuable

Regular meetings, such as monthly reporting meetings and quarterly board meetings, are vital for effective communication between CFOs and investors. Additionally, the use of KPI dashboards helps with tracking and communicating financial risks in an open and transparent manner.

Touchpoints with investors are frequent

Nearly all CFOs have weekly touchpoints with investors. While the engagement in operational matters is intense at the beginning of the journey, it gradually decreases as long as the company's performance meets the plan and core KPIs are achieved.

Expert recommendations

The CFOs whom we interviewed made the following recommendations for collaboration with investors:

1. Deliver results according to the mid-term plan.
2. Be well-prepared, with arguments and numbers ready for healthy debates about direction and strategy.
3. Avoid surprises! Providing full transparency and being able to explain details while maintaining a strategic view are key.
4. Understand the business and translate it into future financial performance.

Conclusion

Collaboration between investors and CFOs is characterized by speed, directness, and a focus on results. Transparency, responsiveness, and adherence to established reporting protocols are crucial for effective collaboration. Understanding the differences in collaboration across ownership structures and investor sizes helps CFOs navigate these dynamics more effectively. By leveraging these insights and expert recommendations, CFOs can foster strong relationships with investors and drive sustainable financial performance in their portfolio companies.

Authors

Nadine Mensdorf is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Private Capital practice. She is based in Frankfurt.
Daniela Nienstedt leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services Sector in Germany. She is based in Frankfurt.
Hannah Klapheck supports executive searches for private equity funds as a researcher, she is based in Frankfurt.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in the UK: Why Most Organizations Aren’t Ready

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices