9 Essentials to Compete in the AI Race | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

9 Essentials to Compete in the AI Race

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

October 13, 2023

3 min

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

AI development is progressing rapidly, presenting vast disruption opportunities. Tech executives must approach AI strategically.

Close

While we are still in the early days of the latest applied artificial intelligence technology cycle, the recent pace of AI development has been supersonic. With vast opportunities for disruption across many markets, the field is wide open.

This wave of innovation is more complex than the cloud and mobile cycles, plus the stakes for future success are higher—AI has challenged tech companies’ operating models, and will continue to do so. How can you ensure that you stay ahead of the curve?

Tech executives must approach AI strategically, focusing on affordability and applicability within business models. Embracing AI's potential requires R&D and collaboration—both internally and externally. Preparing your workforce for data literacy is vital, and building a strong tech foundation is non-negotiable. Tech leaders who navigate this path wisely will reap AI’s many rewards.

Do you have the combination of innovative vision and operational discipline necessary to unlock AI’s full potential at organizations that need it?  We would love to hear from you.

Not sure what it takes? Here are our thoughts:

1. Leadership Consensus: Adopting AI goes beyond technology. It involves reshaping operations, customer engagement, and go-to-market strategies. Organizations and senior leadership teams need to be fully aligned and supportive of a plan for enterprise-wide AI adoption with respect to risks, strategies, and budgets.

2. Creating a Clear Path for Adoption: If you are a senior leader within your company, you can enable transformation and help guide AI adoption by connecting the need for innovation to your culture, employees, and clients. Tell the story of AI and innovation through a lens of applicability.

3. Org Design: AI solutions that are embedded into existing applications or that are purposefully deployed to automate, enhance productivity, or completely transform business processes will lead to a corresponding requirement to rethink organizational structures. Proactively consider what role AI will play in your business as you design future-fit roles and organizational structures.

4. Citizen Scientists: Embedding AI solutions will provoke rethinking traditional role definitions too. While some roles may be eliminated, many more will be enhanced. Some will be created to seize AI’s full potential (e.g., prompt engineers). Developing a data-literate workforce is crucial.

5. Quick Wins: Experimentation is key. Creating an environment for quick AI wins allows for learning and adaptation. To unlock AI's full potential, substantial R&D is required for greater efficiency and quality.

6. Building Strong Foundations: To successfully implement AI, organizations need the right data infrastructure to embed AI/ML models into tech stacks. Recognize the convergence of computing at the storage, edge, network and infrastructure layers and invest wisely.

7. Affordability Matters: While AI can work wonders, companies must assess the cost-effectiveness of each applied solution. The return on investment should align with strategic financial goals.

8. Data Veracity and Ethics: AI integration depends on data quality, governance, and compliance. Clearly define “rules of the road” that guide data usage, AI-generated results evaluations and actions, and how AI usage will be communicated to customers. There are already many privacy and risk considerations that must be weighed as you align AI with your business strategy.

9. Don’t Go It Alone: Big tech companies are able to build massive AI technologies because they can afford the cost of computing. If you have gaps in your infrastructure, industry collaboration is key for developers to make rapid advancements in AI. The classic “build, buy, partner” framework applies here—leveraging open source LLMs can accelerate overall AI development for your company.

Until next time, we hope you enjoy the articles below.

Recent Tech Insights from RRA:

The Rise of AI: Implications for Leadership

Watch our webinar on how AI will impact leadership, hosted by RRA´s CEO and AI experts, and featuring guest speaker Dr. Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic

Navigating the Generative AI Revolution: Five Key Focus Areas for Leading into the Future

When implementing generative AI, consider its impacts on culture, leadership, organization model, commercial strategy, and risk management.

What We’re Reading at RRA:

We are witnessing the perfect AI storm

10 investors talk about the future of AI and what lies beyond the ChatGPT hype.

Broken ‘guardrails’ for AI systems lead to push for new safety measures

Large corporates are enacting AI safety measures to prevent misuse of AI products.

The number of women dropping out of the tech sector is escalating

Are efforts to attract more women into the sector a distraction from trying to keep the women the sector already has?

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices