We Should All Have Imposter Syndrome | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

We Should All Have Imposter Syndrome

Career AdviceInclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesTeam Performance

Article

May 20, 2024

3 min

Career AdviceInclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Long-touted as damaging, new research shows that “imposter” feelings might be a leadership secret weapon. Here’s why that matters for women.

Close

Margot McShane

San Francisco

Hetty Pye

London

Women leaders are 2x likelier than men to experience imposter syndrome. That might make them more interpersonally effective leaders.

Despite performing alongside (or, on coaching & development measures, even outperforming) their male counterparts, women leaders are more likely to feel imposter syndrome—the popular term for sentiments of feeling like you’re undeserving of the role you have or successes you’ve achieved.

Recent Russell Reynolds Associates research found that women leaders are 2.3x more likely to believe they are not equipped to do their manager’s job than men, with 34% disagreeing with the statement, “if my manager were to leave, I have the skills and experience needed to do their job,” versus only 15% of men (Figure 1).

But what if a dose of imposter syndrome wasn’t such a bad thing?

Figure 1: Self-perception of next-level leadership capabilities: women vs men

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates' H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 884 C-level and next gen leaders

While the detrimental impacts of imposter syndrome are well documented, research from Dr. Basima Tewfik at MIT Sloan School of Management seeks to reframe this understanding. Asserting that previous research has incorrectly conflated the phenomenon of imposter syndrome with its negative emotional consequences, Tewfik shows that the concept’s subsequent popularization resulted in a reputation that outgrew its scientific foundations.

In research published in the Academy of Management Journal, Tewfik demonstrates that individuals who experience more workplace imposter thoughts were seen by others as more interpersonally effective – that is, they cooperated, interacted, and worked well with others. This is because “imposter thoughts” encouraged these leaders to focus their attention on their relationships with others, rather than on themselves.

Importantly, despite this focus on others, Tewfik found that workplace imposter thoughts did not impact individuals’ subjective or objective job performance.

Viewing imposter syndrome through this lens not only re-aligns the concept with its original, scientific roots, but it also opens the door to exploring other positive effects.

Imposter syndrome and the changing leadership profile

With technology & generative AI advances increasing the need for human-centered leadership, continued economic and geopolitical uncertainty impacting organizations and individuals alike, and boards increasingly prioritizing social skills in their C-suite hiring, leaders who are more socially collaborative are more likely to be successful.

And, as Tewfik’s research displays, feelings of imposter syndrome can actually improve leaders’ ability to do just that.

For women leaders and the organizations looking to retain them, this presents an opportunity to shift the paradigm about what makes an effective leader in today’s uncertain environment.

Considerations for women leaders

Instead of letting them weigh you down, embrace imposter thoughts. Recognize that they are a healthy sign one is confident in their own abilities and mindful of where others are better equipped than them.

Successful, vulnerable leaders—who we admire and willingly follow—openly accept these thoughts and leverage them to be more learning-oriented in their approach.

In their absence, you will find two scenarios, both of which suggest ineffective leadership: narcissism, which reflects a disastrous cocktail of entitlement, attention-seeking behaviors, inflated self-views, and a lack of empathy towards others, and unfounded overconfidence, where the unskilled are also unaware and tend to overestimate their abilities on tasks they actually know very little about.

Considerations for sponsors of women leaders

Is your sponsee feeling like an imposter? Beyond the obvious reassurances you’ll likely provide, encourage them to use these thoughts to propel themselves into learning mode.

Leaders who don’t assume they know how to do something tend to be more active in looking to learn about said issue. As a result, they’re more open to the experience and expertise of others, invariably making them more insightful and collaborative.

Given the nature of leadership today—where issues and opportunities are rarely unidimensional and naturally require leaders to engage across domains and disciplines—no one in a leadership position should assume they have all the answers or know more than others. Thus, those who are skeptical of their own capabilities are actually better positioned to succeed.

Considerations for organizations

To navigate our current polycrisis, look to your women leaders. Odds are, they are already making decisions that prioritize others. It benefits everyone to help women leaders see themselves more objectively, creating more opportunities (be it through taking on more responsibility or via continual encouragement and advocacy) for them to take the next step.

Beyond giving women leaders better titles or compensation (both necessary), organizations also need to understand whether they are creating an environment that truly supports advancement and rewards human-centered leadership.

In 2013, McKinsey found that corporate culture is twice as important as individual mind-sets in building women’s confidence that they can reach a top management position. If organizations retain more women, who we now know are more motivated by factors that impact more people, they’re more likely to foster a culture that will encourage the next generation of women leaders to aim for the top as well.

The bottom line

The world needs more women leaders. Rather than eschewing imposter thoughts—long thought to hold leaders, particularly women, back—reframe them. Feelings of imposter syndrome may actually be one of your superpowers in the future of leadership.

Authors

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
Navio Kwok is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in Toronto.
Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory practice in the Americas. She is based in San Francisco.
Hetty Pye is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory practice. She is based in London.

The authors would like to thank our Kilberry colleagues whose piece, The Hidden Benefits of Imposter Syndrome, helped provide the framing for this article.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices