Unlocking the Potential of Singapore Boardrooms | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Unlocking the Potential of Singapore Boardrooms

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

Euan Kenworthy

November 07, 2023

3 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Board effectiveness hinges on diverse viewpoints and future readiness, particularly given evolving expectations for corporate governance.

Close

Euan Kenworthy

Singapore

In today’s dynamic and complex business landscape, a board’s effectiveness is greatly influenced by the diversity of its members and their collective ability to critically evaluate decisions, opportunities, and challenges.

Recognizing the importance of this, director succession and board renewal have become increasingly critical in ensuring the optimal composition of boards. Consequently, the traditional reliance on personal networks for board appointments is gradually giving way to a more systematic approach. In tandem, high performing boards are also becoming more open to taking a critical, outside-in view of their make-up and performance, as they look to future challenges that may need to be faced.  Firms like Russell Reynolds Associates are taking center stage in conducting board searches, successions, and evaluations to help support and drive boardroom performance.

To examine board renewal trends and deliberate what makes a high performing board, Russell Reynolds consultants Anupama Puranik and Euan Kenworthy held a closed-door roundtable with a small group of experienced independent directors and senior executives from the Singapore Chapter of INSEAD’s Director Network. The session was moderated by RRA’s Alvin Chiang, and yielded the following takeaways at the end of a lively discussion:

Diversity matters

There is a growing emphasis on diversity, not just in terms of gender representation, but also in terms of backgrounds and perspectives. Initiatives around topics like gender diversity include longlists of board candidates that showcase equal gender representation and increasing openness to first-time women board members to expand the talent pool.

Diversity is also achieved by seeking international representation on the board. However, this definition can vary amongst boards. For example, “Asian” representation may mean prioritizing candidates with extensive experience of living and working in Asia, versus having Asian heritage only.

In identifying board candidates, the traditional focus on hard skills is also undergoing a significant shift. Boards are increasingly acknowledging the need for expertise in diverse and specialized areas, such as HR, technology, innovation, sustainability or inclusive leadership. Moreover, boards are placing increased importance on behavior and soft skills. This shift recognizes that effective board dynamics and decision-making are influenced not only by technical competence, but also by qualities such as emotional intelligence, communication, collaboration, and ethical leadership. Boards are seeking individuals who can contribute to a high performing board culture, engage in constructive dialogue, positively debate key issues in an honest, transparent manner and navigate complex interpersonal dynamics.

As the board’s role grows increasingly complex—especially around governance and risk management—the ability to avoid the ‘group think’ trap and foster an environment that encourages robust debates and discussions have become more critical than ever. Ensuring that prospective board members align with the organization's values and vision is crucial to maintaining harmony within the board and facilitating effective decision-making. However, high performing boards also need individuals who will speak up and critically analyze issues.

When selecting new members, boards also prioritize two key factors: culture fit and reputation. Boards are more carefully evaluating the reputation and track record of external candidates, as their past experiences and achievements can serve as indicators of their potential contributions to the board. Simultaneously, boards are increasingly aware of the need to diversify their own ranks. This recognition stems from the realization that a diverse board can bring fresh perspectives, innovative ideas, and a wider range of experiences to the table. To achieve this, boards are inclining to cast a wider net, actively seeking out candidates beyond their immediate networks or traditional pools. By doing so, they can tap into a wealth of talent and expertise that may have previously been overlooked. However,  the chair and/or a senior director must be prepared to mentor and help develop new or less experienced directors, giving them the confidence to speak up and bring all their experience and judgement to bear.

Being future-ready

Today’s market environment is rapidly evolving, so it is imperative for boards to be future-ready and forward-thinking. This involves asking the right questions, understanding the ever-changing global landscape and staying current on emerging trends and technologies. To foster a culture of innovation and exploration, some boards establish dedicated innovation committees. These committees serve as platforms for board members to delve into new ideas, evaluate emerging strategies, and drive the organization's ability to adapt and thrive in a competitive environment.

Being future-ready also means identifying where the current gaps are in the board. Board evaluations play a crucial role in assessing board effectiveness and identifying areas for improvement. Evaluations can help identify gaps in skills and knowledge, promote diversity, and ensure boards are equipped to navigate future challenges. High performing boards are willing to put themselves under the microscope and receive constructive feedback as to where and how they need to evolve to prepare for a future ready organization.

Governance expectations are changing

As the board landscape undergoes a shift from conformance to performance, it is crucial to maintain a good balance between the two. Board governance and compliance play a pivotal role in ensuring this equilibrium, particularly in times of challenge and uncertainty. Today’s boards face increased responsibility and liability, and hence the need for robust governance structures to protect shareholder interests. The evolving nature of board responsibilities has resulted in a higher demand on directors' time and an intensified workload. This increased workload and responsibility can deter potential directors, especially when it comes to public boards. The commitment required to fulfill these roles may be perceived as a challenge, and individuals may hesitate to take on such positions. To attract the best directors, chairs and NomCos need to be aware of such issues and willing to discuss them transparently.

The importance of an effective board cannot be overstated in today’s complex business landscape, yet building a forward-thinking board presents its own set of challenges. By embracing diversity, being future-ready, and adapting to changing governance expectations, organizations can ensure their boards are well-equipped to navigate the complexities of tomorrow to drive sustainable success.

Authors

Euan Kenworthy is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Partners and the Industrial & Natural Resources sector. He is based in Singapore.
Anupama Puranik is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Partners and the  Healthcare Practice. She is based in Singapore.
Laura Syn leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Knowledge Team in Asia Pacific. She is based in Hong Kong.

Acknowledgements

Alvin Chiang is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Partners. He is based in Singapore.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices