How Industrials Can Tap Into Talent Pools Off the Beaten Paths | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Industrials Can Tap Into Talent Pools Off the Beaten Paths

Career TransitionsTransformation and InnovationIndustrialExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Article

Marnie Smith

September 12, 2023

5 min

Career TransitionsTransformation and InnovationIndustrialExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In the face of monumental change, how can industrial organizations keep pace? By looking for talent in unexpected places.

Close

Marnie Smith

Calgary

Over the past few years and in the years to come, industrial & natural resources companies have undergone and will continue to undergo more fundamental changes than in previous decades combined. To adapt, these organizations need key new talent/skills - but many do not feel well prepared to address this challenge.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we believe industrial leaders need to think differently about talent strategy. Via data from our H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, analysis of over 4,000 successful candidate placements in the Industrial & Natural Resources industries, surveys of over 50 of our consultants and senior researchers, and individual case studies, we learned that:

Availability of key talent/skills is not only a top threat leaders face—it’s also the one that industrial leadership teams feel least prepared to address.

To effectively transform, industrial companies must look for next generation talent also outside their home industries.

Certain industries (industrial services, capital goods & equipment) are more progressive with regards to hiring from the outside than others (power & utilities, oil & gas, metals & mining).

Hiring from outside the industrial & natural resources industry happens across functions, e.g., with increasing demand for technology and commercial expertise, and even at the CEO level.

With these learnings in mind, we identified common pitfalls—and key tips for success—for industrial organizations looking to attract & retain talent outside their industry. By understanding the need for a broader candidate pool, the skills and leadership capabilities that will add value, and how to best position new leaders for success, industrial organizations can tap into talent pools off the beaten path.

Availability of key talent/skills is not only a top threat leaders face—it’s also the one that industrial leadership teams are least prepared to address

Within the industrial & natural resources industry, entire value chains are being upended by sustainable transformation, geopolitical shifts, national/multilateral policies, and the digital/AI revolution, and leaders must deal with these intertwined issues. This is driving an enormous need for new leaders and talent. However, according to industry leaders, availability of key talent/skills is not only a major threat, but one for which leadership teams are the least prepared.

Our H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor—which surveys over 1,500 CEOs, C-level leaders, next generation leaders, and non-executive board directors—shows that 72% of leaders rank availability of key talent/skills as a top five threat to organizational health. Yet only 46% of these leaders believe that their leadership team is prepared to respond.

Figure 1: Leadership preparedness to address external factor by priority

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,523 CEOs, C-level leaders, next generation leaders, and non-executive board directors; n = 279 Industrial/natural resources leaders

To effectively transform, industrial companies must look for next generation talent also outside their own industries

Since 2018, ~67% of the leaders Russell Reynolds Associates placed in key positions at industrial companies came from a different industry. We believe this trend is here to stay: over half of our consultants and senior researchers believe that hiring “from the outside” is increasingly important for industrials.

Figure 2: Backgrounds for RRA successful candidates’ placed into Industrial & Natural Resources companies since 2018

Source: RRA proprietary data from >4,000 placements in Industrial & Natural Resources companies since 2018; based on the last employer of the candidate prior to making the transition

Industrials on the hunt for new leaders and talent can also take advantage of the willingness of industrial leaders to transition within the broader sector. Not only is this important from a skillset perspective, but it’s also necessary to keep industrial talent pipelines full. According to our H1 2023 Monitor, 57% of industrial leaders are likely/very likely to make a career move beyond their current industry today vs 42% of global leaders. If leaders are leaving the industry at a faster rate, openness to non-industrial talent will be crucial for avoiding a limited talent landscape in the future.

Figure 3: Industrial & Natural Resource leaders openness to making a career move

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 872 global C-suite leaders, and next gen leaders; n= 135 Industrial/natural resources leaders

When organizations look for talent outside their native industries, it’s typically to:

Digitally & sustainably transform

Enter new businesses

Cope with a general talent shortage, particularly in regard to diverse leaders

Figure 4: Drivers for industrial companies to hire from outside their respective industry

Source: Survey amongst >50 Russell Reynolds Consultants and Senior Researchers involved in ~1,000 successful candidate searches and placements per year for industrial companies

Certain industries are more progressive with regards to hiring from outside the industrial and natural resources industry than others

Some industries were more progressive with regards to hiring from the outside than others in the past. Automotive OEMs, agriculture & ingredients, capital goods & equipment, and industrial services & infrastructure companies most often hired “from the outside.” Alternatively, oil & gas, metals & mining, power & utilities are the most “conservative” in this respect.

Since these “conservative” industries are undergoing transformation and require leaders to drive it, they especially may want to increasingly consider nontraditional talent pools, too. In fact, many success stories exist in these industries, too, e.g., with new leaders for commercially-oriented and digital roles bringing in fresh perspectives for both, traditional as well as new business areas.

Figure 5: Percentage of candidate placements from outside the respective industry

Source: RRA proprietary data from >4,000 placements in Industrial& Natural Resources companies since 2018

Hiring from outside the industry happens across functions, with demands for increased technology and commercial expertise—even at the CEO level.

We have observed demand for external talent across all functions. Unsurprisingly, the need to digitize has driven demand for technical expertise from outside the industrial space. Additionally, industrial board members come from a variety of industries in order to cover the various board functions. Similarly, for more industry-agnostic roles where functional expertise is key—HR, finance—talent comes from a variety of sectors.

Perhaps more surprisingly, industrial companies are also very often seeking experience outside their industry for commercial roles; for example, when transforming from a product to a solution-based organization. For technology / commercial roles, over 80% / 70% of RRA consultants and researchers believe that outside of industry hiring will continue to play a (somewhat or very significant) role.

When it comes to CEOs and operations & supply chain officers, companies typically value extensive industry experience. Still, half of the CEOs RRA placed since 2018 came from another industry.

Diverse talent from different backgrounds is not only important in industry-agnostic functions. Eventually, every function can benefit from complementary skills and experiences, and companies should not miss out on this opportunity to differentiate.

Figure 6: Percentage of candidate placements from outside the industrial industry by function/role

Source:
RRA proprietary data from >4,000 placements in Industrial & Natural Resources companies since 2018

Setting the unconventional candidate up for success in the industrial & natural resources industry

When looking for a transition candidate, Russell Reynolds looks for:

Successful transition track record – Demonstrated ability to perform in different industries and settings, ideally, successfully transitioned before, demonstrated adaptability. That said, we would not recommend to change too many dimensions (industry, role, scope of responsibility, …) at once.

Wide Leadership Span – A candidate’s ability to pivot and adapt based on the specific context in which they’re operating generally allow them to better perform in ambiguous or challenging settings.

Intelligence & curiosity – While we assume a certain higher level of intelligence and curiosity in all successful (future) leaders, those that are especially “fast on their feet,” are more likely to hit a new ground running too. They will be less likely to simply just copy and paste what has worked before in their “home-turf,” but adapt and optimize successful practices to a new setting.

Strong stakeholder management skills – Building credibility can be challenging without past industry successes to rely on. Therefore, it is even more important to “connect & click” with all stakeholders. Failure to understand industry specificities—like working with associations, labor unions, specific shareholder groups—can cause unprepared candidates to stumble.

But even the most adaptable, curious candidate will struggle if the hiring company does not create an environment in which they can thrive. This starts when designing the search process and continues through interviews and onboarding. From our experience, the following four actions are especially important for hiring companies:

Clear strategy articulation – A vague plan to “hire for fresh perspectives” is not enough. There needs to be a clear strategy and articulation as to why the new leader’s external skillset is needed. If not, the “unconventional candidate” may feel undervalued.

Top of the house support & communication – Demonstrate support to create an environment where unconventional leaders can thrive. Communicate industry differences; e.g., clarify that different industries work at different speeds (in decision-making, product development/innovation cycles, etc.) Ignorance will lead to friction.

Effective & tailored onboarding – Connect the new leader to key people early, including “industry” mentors that will ease their transition into this new space.

Think “complementary”– Rather than expecting the new hire to do it all, create an
effective team that together will tick all the boxes.

Where next?

Understand which key (new) skills and talent are required to deliver your strategy.

Ensure that your strategy not only is translated into mid-term/longer-term financial plans, but also into an HR strategy reflective of future needed profiles.

Expand your target universe.

When it is possible to prioritize skills over years of industry experience, be creative regarding where to look for the leaders/talent with these skills—even  beyond your own and adjacent industries.

Create an environment for unconventional talent to thrive.

Be outspoken and communicate why you are bringing in unconventional talent/leaders. Do not expect for things to work out without the proper supporting structures.

Methodology

We analyzed over 4,000 RRA candidate placements across all functions (board, CEO, C-suite, and next generation leaders) in industrial and natural resources industries since 2018 to understand how often cross-industry transitions take place when companies look for external candidates. Industries analyzed include auto OEMs, suppliers, commercial and specialty vehicles manufacturers, agriculture, chemicals/materials/packaging, metals & mining, oil & gas, power & utilities, aerospace & defense, capital goods & equipment, industrial services, infrastructure, transportation & logistics.

Additionally, we surveyed over 50 RRA consultants and senior researchers involved in these searches to understand more qualitatively, why and for what industries were looking beyond industry borders. As a part of this survey, we investigated approximately 50 cases more closely, to understand in detail pitfalls and success factors of industry transitions.

Authors

Saya L. Fryer is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources Sector. She is based in Calgary.

Markus Knopf is the Global Knowledge Leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial & Natural Resources Sector. He is based in Munich.

Jina Abells Morissette is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources Sector. She is based in Calgary.

Marnie Smith is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Partners, Industrial and Natural Resources and Financial Services Sectors. She is based in Calgary.

How Industrials Can Tap Into Talent Pools Off the Beaten Paths

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices