Chapter 4: Failing to consider the ripple effects of the CEO selection decision | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Chapter 4: Failing to consider the ripple effects of the CEO selection decision

In a dynamic leadership landscape, leaders need to anticipate how decisions in one area affect adjacent issues, and work to mitigate potential consequences. During CEO succession, the board needs to engage in second-order thinking—pausing to question initial decisions and deliberate on how proposed solutions will impact the future.

In appointing the next CEO, boards may not adequately anticipate the domino effects of CEO succession, shy away from transforming the C-suite, and fail to effectively invest in the new leadership team.

Trap: Falling into a stability fallacy

The succession process is an intense and high-stakes process, one that often leads boards to fall into the stability fallacy, fearing that any additional changes to the leadership team will cause unnecessary uncertainty and instability. Too often, boards leave C-suite composition and growth to the incoming CEO to solve for themselves. While the rationale here is reasonable—wanting to take into account the relationship between the independent board leader and the new CEO, and give the new chief executive the right to make their own decisions on the team around them—it’s important for boards to recognize that the new CEO, especially if they are external, has a steep hill to climb.

Often, boards immediately jump to identifying new roles or capabilities needed to complement the new CEO. Equally important, but typically overlooked, is discerning how existing roles or capabilities need to shift to complement the new CEO and C-suite team. Regardless of the CEO appointment outcome, C-suite leaders are already contemplating how their existing roles may change.

Some C-suite leaders may have been involved in the succession process as candidates, which will amplify their consideration of career options and growth, while others will be thinking about how the new CEO will impact them. Even if there are no new additions to the C-suite team, there is value in reshuffling remits to allow leaders to explore new leadership opportunities, such as being responsible for initiatives outside of their primary area of expertise, gaining international exposure, or leading a transformation or systemic change.

Boards must actively engage with the C-suite team’s evolution to create engagement, development, and commitment. Through the CEO succession process, the board and the CHRO should have gained clarity on the performance, potential, and aspirations of key C-suite leaders. It’s imperative that boards leverage this wealth of information, along with its guidance on the future trajectory of the organization, and proactively engage with the new CEO on leadership talent decisions.

How can boards overcome this CEO succession decision-making complexity?

Welcome C-suite shifts and adjust responsibilities based on retention, aspiration, and skills of the existing top team.
Appointing a successful CEO is not just about the position itself—an accomplished CEO succession also means establishing a stable, complementary C-suite team. Boards can support the new CEO’s leadership by proactively identifying which individuals may need new remits in anticipation of the next CEO succession cycle, evaluating the health of the new C-suite team against the 5Cs of C-suite performance, and adjusting development plans to ensure deeper commitment and enhance team stability.

Experiencing psychological complexities throughout the CEO succession process is natural. By being aware of these elements throughout the decision-making processes, boards can consciously:

Invest in strategic alignment efforts when defining success factors

Expand optionality when determining the talent universe

Conduct true leadership evaluations when assessing candidates

Anticipate how the CEO succession process will impact the organization’s future leadership

« Previous Chapter

Foreword »

Explore more chapters

Chapter 1: Underestimating strategic alignment efforts when defining success factors

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting strategic alignment and how to overcome them

Chapter 2: Forgetting to create sufficient optionality when determining the talent universe

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting optionality and how to overcome them

Chapter 3: Distorting the leadership evaluation when assessing candidates

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting leadership evaluation and how to overcome them

Methodology

Data sourced from Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, which surveyed 500 CEOs, board directors, and CHROs on the state of CEO succession and stakeholder perspectives, and interviews with 14 of our Board and CEO Advisory Partners consultants.

Authors

Joy Tan and Tom Handcock of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

Learn more about the authors and The Center for Leadership Insight

Justus O’Brien is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in New York.
Dean Stamoulis is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in Atlanta.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank contributors from Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners who participated for their time and their valuable perspective:

Gretchen Anderson

Sarah Eames

Dee Fitzgerald

David Lange

Stephen Langton

Margot McShane

Luke Meynell

Rusty O’Kelley

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Jennifer Rockwood

Charles Tribbett III

Ty Wiggins

Anita Wingrove

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Start your CEO Succession story

Speak to a Consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices