Refreshing Talent Strategy in China’s Complex Market Environment | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Refreshing Talent Strategy in China’s Complex Market Environment

Leadership StrategiesCareer AdviceTransformation and InnovationHuman Resources Officers

Article

Jeremy Shi

November 20, 2023

6 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer AdviceTransformation and InnovationHuman Resources Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

To navigate the market uncertainty in a post-pandemic Chinese economy, both companies and leaders should select priorities to address talent challenges.

Close

Jeremy Shi

Shanghai

In today’s post-pandemic era, uncertainty permeates every aspect of the global economy. In particular, the Chinese economy now faces numerous new variables and challenges, such as real estate liquidation, weak demand, and decreasing exports.

To adapt to the new market environment, companies that operate in China need to change both their business approach and talent strategy. Multinational corporations (MNCs) need to be more localized, taking a “be China for China” approach.1 Conversely, domestic Chinese companies are looking to internationalize, increasingly involving the global value chain.

To help organizations bridge these gaps, Russell Reynolds Associates developed recommendations for creating new, robust talent strategies that complement China’s evolving business context.

China’s “new normal” is creating new market opportunities

Single circulation: China produces goods and services and sells them to foreign markets.

Dual circulation: China produces goods and services and sells them to both foreign and domestic markets, with a focus on boosting domestic demand.

The Chinese economy’s “new normal” promotes the transition from a "single circulation" to a "dual circulation" economy. Related, "talent strategy" has become a key focus of China's "14th Five-Year Plan"2  and will be implemented between 2025 and 2035. As a result, the traditional approach of evaluating the Chinese economy based on GDP growth rate needs to be reassessed. Business leaders must shift their perspectives towards reform and new market opportunities.

These trends in the Chinese market are differentiating new business considerations— including consumption upgrades, supply chain integration, and technological advancements—from traditional ones, such as real estate, exports, and investments. China's unique market structure and digital environment continually incubate new technology pioneers. These companies have gradually become leaders in global fields such as consumer goods, high-end manufacturing, new energy, and biotechnology.

Consumer Goods: In the mass consumer sector, trends such as consumption upgrades, rational consumption, increased social media influence, and new retail will reshape the future. Projections show that, by 2025, China will account for nearly 25% of all global luxury goods consumption.3

Pharmaceutical: Chinese pharmaceutical companies4 are expanding to compete with MNCs operating in China. Chinese pharmaceutical companies have also made substantial breakthroughs in international licensing cooperation. Meanwhile, the launch of government bidding is driving companies to optimize channels, reduce costs, enhance research and development capabilities, explore new product lines, and expand overseas markets.

Supply Chain: Stable supply chains and robust risk management measures are essential for business success. Building a digitalized supply chain can contribute to the formation of a "dual circulation" economy. Additionally, companies should actively expand their supply chain's "external circulation" to better adapt to the new normal.

Manufacturing: High-end manufacturing will bring continuous transformation to industrial production, further enhancing a company's global competitiveness. Practices such as digitalization, process automation, and AI adaptation will make companies more efficient and more globally competitive. Additionally, some companies are developing B2C channels, to meet consumer needs with more agility.

Evolving talent characteristics in the face of uncertain, complex Chinese markets

Over the past two decades, the Chinese talent market has undergone three stages of change. From 2000 to 2009, there was a shortage of high-end local talent despite significant market demand. From 2010 to 2019, the supply of local talent increased, but still fell short of market demand. However, since 2020, the supply of local talent has continued to grow.

Overall, we observe the following characteristics amongst current Chinese talent:

Senior domestic talent: Talent in China has localized rapidly, and Chinese leaders and professionals with a global mindset are highly sought after. China has witnessed the rise of many large start-ups that offer high salaries, high degrees of freedom, and senior positions, attracting more executive talent.

Internationalized high-end talent:  Complex market changes have led more Chinese professionals to explore overseas opportunities, enabling them to bring international experience when they return to roles in China.

Cross-industry talent:  Talent mobility across industries has become more common. Past experience is no longer the sole measure of talent.

Digitally-oriented talent:  Companies on digital transformation journeys have seized opportunities to attract top talent from the technology industry.

Overcoming talent challenges in China’s new environment

Many traditional domestic companies seeking to transform hope to find versatile and tech-oriented leaders. Despite the abundance of talent in the market, companies still face challenges in identifying core competencies and helping newly appointed executives integrate into corporate culture. Recent Bain research found that the turnover rate of high-end talent hired externally by private enterprises exceeds 40% within three years,5  indicating that executives may not have enough time to demonstrate their value before moving on to other companies. This phenomenon is particularly prominent in medium-sized enterprises (with annual revenue between 10-50 billion RMB). Resolving this challenge requires efforts from both companies and leaders.

Companies aiming to attract and retain excellent talent should:

Adhere to a talent strategy of openness and inclusiveness, recruiting external multi-level talent to infuse fresh blood into the organization.

Help newly appointed executives integrate by patiently facilitating their onboarding, allowing them time to learn the business and demonstrate value.

Prioritize managerial talent with an international perspective to support the expansion into new markets, along with professional and institutional decision-making mechanisms.

Provide training to facilitate employee growth and ensure the transfer of corporate culture and expertise.

Establish transparent communication channels and foster a culture of truthfulness and pragmatism.

Offer better compensation, higher work flexibility, and more senior positions to attract executive level talents—many larger start-ups have been successful with this approach.

In order to win in this complex environment, leaders in China should prioritize:

Lifelong learning around cross-disciplinary capabilities:

Maintain market sensitivity, reject complacency, and expand perspectives by combining professional knowledge and experience, actively learn and explore cross-industry best practices.

Flexibly transfer knowledge and experience to new industries and fields, exploring new patterns.

Maintain an open learning attitude towards emerging technology trends. Actively work to understand and implement disruptive technologies, such as artificial intelligence.

Develop a global vision, cross-industry insights, and strategic thinking to quickly identify new opportunities in new environments.

Empowering your team:

Use a coaching approach to build a highly effective team with active participation from everyone.

Broadly incorporate overseas and cross-industry talents into the company, respecting the diversity of the team composition.

Strengthen the company's talent pipeline through proactive talent development planning.

Balancing short term and long term goals:

As the market continues to change, ensure you are looking ahead to future mandates while continuing to innovate on a day-to-day basis.

Identify risks and benefits that accompany tech innovations and a changing workforce, and plan around them.

Prioritize relationship building to break down silos in this new environment, achieve a broader perspective, and get things done.

By addressing talent challenges at both the company and leadership levels, businesses can navigate the complex new market environment and gain a competitive edge in China.

Author

Jeremy Shi is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ industrial practice. He is based in Shanghai.

References

1 Redefining Future Operations Strategies in China | Russell Reynolds Associates

2 Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and Long-Range Objectives for 2035

3 PWC: Insights into the Luxury Goods Market in Mainland China and Hong Kong, 2023

4 Going Global: Talent Advice from China’s Healthcare Internationalization Executives | Russell Reynolds Associates

5 Bain: a survey of 80 listed private companies

Refreshing Talent Strategy in China’s Complex Market Environment

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices