Inside the Mind of the COO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Inside the Mind of the COO

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerFinancial ServicesHealthcareIndustrialChief Executive OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 2 authors

December 11, 2023

9 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerFinancial ServicesHealthcareIndustrialChief Executive OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Are you grooming a COO for the CEO role? Our research uncovers personality differences that should be reflected in their coaching and development plan.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Scott E Smith

Dallas

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

The COO role is making a comeback, as more companies add a COO to their C-suite. The role has become bigger and more strategic than ever before, emerging as a top contender for the CEO position. With proliferation of digital technologies and increased sustainability expectations, we expect the role to continue expanding.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we have seen these changes in our search and consulting client executions, which prompted us to deepen our understanding of the personality, values and interests of these leaders. To accomplish this and help boards, CEOs and HR leaders better understand these executives, we analyzed the Hogan psychometric test scores of nearly a thousand COOs with focus on common personality traits and values, learning that:

COOs tend to have six characteristics in common

There are several notable differences between COOs based in Europe and those in North America

The biggest difference between COOs and CEOs is their preference towards creative and innovative working environments

The fluid nature of the COO role

How to best describe the COO? It’s not easy, as the role has variances between industry, organization, and need. That said, we’ve identified five COO archetypes from our client executions, illustrating the variations that can exist from one position to another. Furthermore, these real-life examples exemplify the range of operational, commercial, strategic, risk management, sustainability, and technology responsibilities the role can encompass.

Figure 1: COOs across five different organizations

Insights from Hogan psychometric analysis: Six common COO characteristics

To profile this versatile C-suite leader, we analysed the Hogan psychometric data of 979 COOs, with the majority hailing from North America and Europe. The assessment scores individuals across 28 metrics—from their day-to-day behavior, to how they perform under stress and external pressures. Furthermore, they provide insights into a person’s core values, goals, and interests.

While there are clearly several COO archetypes, our analysis uncovered six common psychometric characteristics among the COO population: pragmatic and composed, collaborative individualist, avid learner, driven, creative and resourceful, and service oriented (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Common COO characteristics

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of Hogan psychometric data. N = 979 COOs.

A regional comparison between European and North American COO profiles

The COO profile doesn’t just vary across industry and organization, but also across regions. This is evident in the notable distinctions between COOs based in Europe and those in North America (Figure 3).

While COOs from both regions typically prefer working environments that are productive and follow a no-nonsense mentality, North American COOs tend to prefer this more, scoring 30% lower on the “hedonism” measure. Additionally, North American COOs tend to be slightly more service oriented and appreciative of environments that enable them to help others (altruistic). While North American COOs tend to prefer a balance between individualistic and collaborative work environments, European COOs have slightly higher preference for collaborative environments (affiliation). While COOs in both regions generally thrive in fast-paced work environments where they can adapt to change, the inclination towards such environments is slightly more pronounced in Europe compared to North America (security). North American COOs, even more than their European counterparts, appear to value their own and their organization’s financial success (commerce). Recognizing these regional differences helps guide talent mobility, recruitment, attraction and development efforts, and provides areas to probe when assessing COO candidates.

Figure 3: Differences between North American and European COOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of Hogan psychometric data. N = 753 COOs (432 from Europe and 321 from North America).

Note: Hedonism - higher scorers derive motivation from working in environments that place a premium on having & creating opportunities for fun. Lower scorers prefer serious, productivity-focused environments. / Altruistic - higher scorers derive motivation from providing service to others in a hands-on manner, while lower scorers don’t derive motivation as a service provider. / Affiliation - higher scorers derive motivation from working in roles that provide them considerable  opportunity to build relationships & network. Lower scores are content to work independently. / Security - higher scorers derive motivation from working in secure, predictable environments that  minimize risk & ambiguity. Lower scorers prefer fast-paced environments in which they have to quickly deal with & adapt to changes. / Commerce - higher scorers derive motivation from making money for themselves & the organization. Lower scorers can be better motivated via non-financial rewards. Figure uses mean scores across the sample of COOs. Figure highlights some of the statistically notable differences between COOs and CEOs with emphasis on motives, values and preferences.

The rise of COOs to CEOs: A comparative analysis of leadership profiles

In 2022, RRA research found that 43% of CEOs in the Fortune 250 companies had been promoted from the COO position, making it the most commonly held internal role prior to taking the top job. A 2021 McKinsey study of Fortune 500 and S&P 500 CEO promotions corroborates our study, finding that 27% of CEOs held a COO role prior.1  This is because the COO role provides critical experiences that are important for CEO development. Interestingly, we are also seeing some organizations use the COO role to groom potential CEOs who have more traditional commercial or financial background.

To understand the personality differences between COOs and CEOs, we analyzed Hogan psychometric assessment scores of 979 COOs and 1,109 CEOs. The results show only a few differences between the two leaders (Figure 4). While both COOs and CEOs may test limits and take risks, CEOs typically exhibit a higher propensity for doing so (mischievous). While both cohorts rely on their charisma in high-pressure situations, COOs often exhibit a less dominant approach in doing so (colorful). COOs have a tendency to share their ideas before fully vetting them, but CEOs are even more inclined to do so (imaginative). Lastly, CEOs tend to have a stronger preference for creative and innovative environments while COOs usually prefer a balance between practicality and creativity (aesthetic). When grooming a COO for the top job, their coping strategy in response to pressure may impact the perception of that individual’s performance as a CEO, and should be reflected in their coaching and development plan.

Figure 4: Differences between COOs and CEOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of Hogan psychometric data. N = 979 COOs, n = 1,109 CEOs.

Mischievous - Higher scorers tend to test limits, take risks, and push boundaries. / Colorful - higher scorers tend to dominate interactions and over-use their charisma. / Imaginative - higher scorers tend to share their ideas before fully vetting them. / Aesthetic - higher scorers derive motivation from creative and innovative environments. Figure uses mean scores across samples of COOs and CEOs, and focuses on differences that are statistically significant.

Leveraging COO assessments for effective talent development and CEO succession planning

Although the COO role can be as unique as the individuals who occupy it, understanding common personality traits, values, and interests within the COO population helps organizations recruit, retain, and develop COOs. To act on these learnings—and support the COO to CEO succession pipeline—leaders should:

Consider utilizing common COO characteristics as a reference point when recruiting or contemplating development opportunities: Not only do they help CEOs and HR leaders better understand the COO population, these characteristics also shed light on the environments and situations preferred or disliked by COOs, thereby guiding retention efforts.

Recognize regional differences: When recruiting across regions or considering internal transfers, understand the differences between European COOs and their North American counterparts.

Reflect on COO and CEO distinctions when planning CEO succession: Understanding these differences can guide the development and coaching of internal candidates. While comprehensive CEO succession planning involves multiple aspects, the insights from our study can help better understand the behavioral disparities specifically in high-pressure situations.

Consider investing in assessments provided by an external advisor: There are seven steps to successful CEO succession and the assessment of internal leaders is one of them. Our Global Leadership Monitor found that, while psychometric assessment is best practice when evaluating potential CEOs, only 20% of organizations routinely include it in their succession planning. By adding scientific rigor to the assessment process, better and often less obvious potential successors can emerge, improving leadership diversity and organizational performance.

Authors

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Dallas.

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in the Americas. He is based in Toronto.

Scott Smith is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment, Culture and Development capability. He is based in Dallas.

Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.

Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.

Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.

Randy Octuck is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment, Culture and Development knowledge team. He is based in Portland.

References

1 Darryl Piasecki. October 31, 2022. Stepping up: What COOs will need to succeed in 2023 and beyond. McKinsey. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/operations/our-insights/stepping-up-what-coos-will-need-to-succeed-in-2023-and-beyond

Inside the Mind of the COO

Download here

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices