The Authority Gap is Still a Reality for Women Executives. Here’s How to Fix It | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Authority Gap is Still a Reality for Women Executives. Here’s How to Fix It

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Article

December 21, 2023

7 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Executive Summary

The Authority Gap reveals how women are still underestimated. Coaching can help women recognize their value and overcome bias.

Close

In her book The Authority Gap: Why Women Are Still Taken Less Seriously Than Men, British journalist, BBC broadcaster and author Mary Ann Sieghart reveals how despite all our progress we’ve made, women are still chronically overlooked and underestimated, even at the highest levels of power—from Presidents and Prime Ministers to CEOs and thought leaders.

During my nearly 40-year career as a technology leader in male-dominated industries, I have seen and experienced this phenomenon for myself more times than I care to remember.

And so, inspired by the works of both Sieghart and Ali Vitali (Electable: Why America Hasn't Put a Woman in the White House... Yet), I set out to conduct my own qualitative research into this pervasive problem—and explore what role coaching might play in providing some solutions.

First, what is the Authority Gap?

It is the unspoken, unconscious bias that challenges women, based solely on their gender. It is the double standard that gives a man the benefit of the doubt, while constantly challenging a woman’s knowledge, expertise and power.

To quote Rebecca Solnit (who coined the term ‘mansplaining’), the Authority Gap is: “the presumption that makes it hard, at times, for any woman in any field; that keeps women from speaking up and from being heard when they dare; that crushes young women into silence indicating, the way harassment on the street does, that this is not their world. It trains us in self-doubt and self-limitation just as it exercises men’s unsupported over confidence.”

Even senior women at the top of their fields are not immune. In her book, Mary Ann Sieghart shares a story of an encounter between former Xerox CEO Anne Mulcahy and President George W. Bush. At a White House reception to thank Mulcahy and five other CEOs for their exemplary work fundraising for the victims of an earthquake in Pakistan, President Bush mistakenly thanked Mulcahy’s husband instead of her for “his amazing work at Xerox.”

Sieghart also tells the story of Mary McAleese, former President of the Republic of Ireland. Upon being introduced to Pope John Paul II on an official visit to the Vatican, the Pope reached past McAleese to shake her husband’s hand, asking whether he “would not prefer to be the President of Ireland, rather than be married to the President of Ireland?”

Recent research from McKinsey backs up these anecdotal examples. According to their Women In The Workplace Report 2022, women leaders are twice as likely as men to be mistaken for someone more junior. And it added that women are also “far more likely than men leaders to have colleagues question their judgment or imply that they aren’t qualified for their jobs.”

How does the Authority Gap impact senior executives today?

I was curious to learn more about how women at the top of their game experienced the Authority Gap. So, I carried out in-depth interviews with women in the United States who were either C-suite executives, or direct reports to C-suite executives. All were in their early to mid-fifties and half were women of color.

Here's what I learned:

The Authority Gap is real—and most women experience it. The concept of the Authority Gap resonated very strongly with every woman I spoke to. All had stories of being talked over, interrupted, or ignored. And all had experienced having their ideas or suggestions met with silence or skepticism—only for a man to be praised for saying exactly the same thing, moments later.

In the words of one interviewee, “it feels like it’s not even a debate, it is so obvious in my own experience.”

Conditioning for the Authority Gap starts early. I heard how women are often socialized from a young age to be quieter, better behaved, and less outspoken. One interviewee recalled being told to “walk quietly” and that she “argued too much” as a child. (I, myself, was often told in a derisive tone, “My goodness, you are so outspoken!”) Whatever the message, this conditioning starts at an early age, and continues throughout life.

The Authority Gap makes women lose confidence. When women are interrupted, ignored or spoken over, they often blame themselves or try to rationalize why it happened. Maybe I was too quiet. Maybe I was too assertive. Maybe they didn’t hear me. Maybe I didn’t explain myself clearly enough.
Over time, these constant microaggressions chip away at a woman’s confidence and self-belief. And according to a 2001 Columbia Business School study, the ‘sincere overconfidence’ of their male colleagues only exacerbates the problem.

As one of my interviewees observed: “In these situations I always ask myself, ‘What did I do wrong? What could I have done better?’  I notice that whenever something doesn’t go my husband’s way he says, ‘What is wrong with them? What should they have done differently?’”

The Authority Gap can be overcome. Each of the women I spoke to had pivotal moments when they began to realize that they weren’t to blame—a moment when they truly recognized the value they brought to their organizations and teams. Once this lightning bolt had hit, they found it within themselves to point out they had already made the same suggestion at an earlier point in a conversation or ask an interrupter to let them finish their point. Once they acknowledged the value they brought to the table, it boosted their self-confidence and they found they could overcome the barriers to their achievement.

How coaching can help close the Authority Gap

Every woman will have experienced the Authority Gap at some point in her life, whether or not she had a name for it. But few will have ever seen or heard someone acknowledge it before. That must change.

By acknowledging what is happening and helping women to focus on their knowledge, capabilities and accomplishments, we can help build their self-confidence and lessen the impact of gender bias.

And this is where coaching can help, by bringing empathy and understanding to this topic.

01. Coaches can help you recognize the issue. Clearly, the first step in tackling any problem is to acknowledge that it exists, to speak the unspoken, make the invisible visible. The most powerful thing that coaches can do is simply acknowledge that the Authority Gap is real. It isn’t a figment of your imagination. It happens to all women, all the time. And it isn’t your fault. Simply hearing someone speak these truths out loud can be incredibly powerful. It will help you reflect on the reality of the situation, how you feel about it, and how it’s affecting your performance.

02. Coaches can help you claim your expertise. Think back over some of the confusing feedback or reactions you’ve had over the years, and ask yourself: would they have said or done the same thing to a man in the same situation? Coaches can help you truly reflect on the reactions you’ve received from managers and peers and reframe them in the context of the value your bring. They can help you focus on your competencies and areas of expertise; how they are differentiated from others; and how you can bring that differentiation to bear to solve problems and boost performance. This is critical if you are to reconcile and diffuse the confusion you often feel around biased feedback.

03. Coaches can help you perform. Recognition of the situation and owning your expertise can help you build self-confidence and develop coping strategies. What will you say next time someone steals your idea? What will you do next time someone tries to speak over you? Having a few pre-planned coping strategies up your sleeve makes these kinds of microaggressions easier to deflect, in the heat of the moment. Coaches can share their own experiences to inspire you to test new techniques, actions, and behaviors, and ultimately find what works for you.

Ultimately, the Authority Gap is not for women to fix. It’s not women who must change. Organizations must change, society must change, the system must change. We need to raise awareness of the Authority Gap and call it out where we see it. Only then will organizations truly move the dial on inclusive leadership, and benefit from the full suite of leadership competencies that fuel organizational performance.

Authors

Kathleen M. Fitzpatrick, CIO Russell Reynolds Associates

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices