Gender Diversity in the C-suite | Women’s representation in the 2024 S&P 100 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Gender Diversity in the C-suite

Women’s representation in the 2024 S&P 100

In March of 2024, S&P Global published an alarming report: for the first time in two decades, C-suite women lost seats in the S&P Total Market Index. In 2022, women held 12.2% of the ~15,000 C-suite positions across publicly traded U.S. firms. However, this regressed to just 11.8% by the end of 2023.

While the report offers an overview of C-suite gender diversity, it does not examine women’s representation within specific leadership roles. Understanding these nuances is key to moving past gender diversity generalizations toward a more substantive analysis of those with power and influence. Those listed as an organization’s top team provide a clearer indicator of where power truly resides within a company’s structure and hierarchy.

To better understand how women’s representation is changing within specific leadership roles across America’s largest public organizations, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed the C-suites of the top 100 companies in the S&P 500 (referred to as the S&P 100 in this report). We learned that:

Learn more about Artemis, RRA’s exclusive development program designed to accelerate women leaders from the world’s most influential organizations into the CEO seat.

Compared to our 2022 gender diversity analysis, we are no closer to overall parity

Men are 2.5x more likely than women to be executives—and 10.2x more likely to be CEOs—in the S&P 100’s top leadership teams

Women are severely under-represented in roles that matter most for reaching the top job, including CFO, COO, and P&L leadership positions

Only six S&P 100 organizations have achieved gender parity on their senior leadership teams

The world needs more women leaders. Research shows that firms with more women in senior positions are more profitable, more socially responsible, and provide safer, higher-quality customer experiences. And RRA’s own research shows that women leaders perform alongside (or, on coaching & development measures, even outperform) their male counterparts.  And while change is happening, this data shows that it’s not happening fast—or consistently—enough.

Gender parity remains a long ways away

Unsurprisingly, in the two years since we last measured gender diversity in the S&P 100’s C-suites, women remain severely underrepresented.

There are 74% fewer women executives in leadership teams than there are in the US population (Figure 1). While women account for 50.5% of the US population benchmark, they account for just 29% of all executives in the top leadership teams of the S&P 100. Comparably, men account for 71% of the executives in those top leadership teams.

Figure 1: Men and women’s representations in the S&P 100 (2024)

Note: 50.5% of the US population are women.
Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, S&P 100 Leadership Teams, 2024 (n=100 companies, 1553 executives); Population benchmark from US Census Bureau 2022 population estimates, https://data.census.gov/table/ACSST1Y2022.S0101?g=010XX00US

Underrepresented where it matters most: Women leaders in the S&P 100 are absent from typical CEO feeder roles

Women hold a mere 9% of the CEO roles in the S&P 100. There needs to be 5.7x the number of women CEOs to be at parity with the population benchmark.

The traditional CEO feeder roles of CFO, COO, and P&L leaders show significant underrepresentation of women, which makes the path toward CEO that much more difficult (Figure 2). In looking at the COO role (8%), we would need to see 6.6x more women in the role to reach parity with the population benchmark, and 2.5x more women in the CFO role (20%).

Figure 2: S&P 100 gender distribution by executive roles

Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, S&P 100 Leadership Teams, 2024 (n=100 companies, 1553 executives); Population benchmark from US Census Bureau 2022 population estimates, https://data.census.gov/table/ACSST1Y2022.S0101?g=010XX00US

On a more encouraging note, some of these CEO feeder roles have seen a slight improvement in women’s representation since 2022. The share of women P&L leaders increased by 4pp (20% to 24%). Women CFOs increased by 2pp (18% in 2022 to 20% in 2024)—meaning that two more women stepped into CFO roles over the past two years. This aligns with our Global CFO Turnover Index,  which identified that, in H1 2024, 44 of the 163 CFOs appointed were women—the highest number of women CFO appointments in the past five years.

That said, women remain massively underrepresented in the COO role—of the 26 COOs currently in the S&P 100, only two are women (more on this below).

Women hold 72% of S&P 100 CHRO roles, but most are the only female voice on these top leadership teams.

The CHRO role is the only S&P 100 C-suite position in which gender disparity favors women, as women hold 72% of these roles. However, according to our H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, CHROs are also the least likely member of the C-suite to aspire to the CEO role, with a mere 14% naming this as a career goal. This speaks to the motivation gaps in what women and men seek in their careers and shows that, despite women’s better representation in this space, it’s unlikely to meaningfully impact their ascendency to the CEO role—at least in the immediate future.

The gender breakdown by role demonstrates that S&P 100 organizations cannot make measurable progress towards gender parity in the top job unless they consider a broader range of executive backgrounds for their CEO candidates.

Deep dive: The COO role is often viewed as the “CEO in waiting” role. But does this approach overly favor men?

In 2022, RRA research found that 43% of CEOs in the Fortune 250 companies were promoted from the COO position, making it the most commonly held internal role prior to taking the top job. And our Global Leadership Monitor confirms that the majority of COOs align with this framing, with 59% agreeing that their career goal is to become a CEO. However, over the past two years, this goal only came to fruition for men.

Returning to the S&P 100, of the 35 men who were a COO in 2022, eight have been promoted to CEO or President at their same organization. One other left their organization for a president role elsewhere. But of the four women who’d held the COO role, none had been promoted—and three out of four left their operating roles to pursue boards/advisory work (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Where did the COOs of 2022 land in 2024?

Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, S&P 100 Leadership Teams, n=39 COOs in 2022; 26 COOs in 2024.

The COO remit has never been consistent—it varies significantly by industry and organization, and is often tied to a specific organizational need (e.g., transformation, training the next CEO). For example, of the eight organizations that promoted their COO to CEO since 2022, only three have hired a new COO. The rest have left the seat empty.

As such, there is a large amount of variation in the number of S&P COOs. And despite recent reports of COOs making a comeback, we found that the number of COOs in the S&P 100 actually dropped—from 39 to 26—over the last two years.

Our findings demonstrate that the COO role continues to be a key path into the CEO role (and in many instances may actually be a temporal “CEO in waiting” position). This stepping stone does not, however, appear to be working for women.

Conspicuous in their absence: A mere six organizations have achieved gender parity in the S&P 100

While it’s important to understand gender representation across the S&P 100’s executive population, it’s perhaps even more crucial to understand how it varies between companies. With that, we analyzed each S&P 100 leadership team, only including organizations with seven or more executives in the C-suite (97 in total.)

As of July of 2024, one S&P 100 senior leadership team is comprised of all men, and four have only one woman executive onboard (Figure 4). Thirty-nine C-suites have less than 25% women, and the majority (68) are comprised of less than one-third women.

Only six S&P 100 leadership teams are comprised of 50% or more women, meaning the vast majority (91) have yet to reach gender parity.

The six organizations that have achieved parity all look different from an industry and product offering perspective. That said, they are all well-established companies—with one exception, all of them were founded over fifty years ago.

Figure 4: S&P 100 leadership team gender diversity snapshot

Only companies with 7 or more executives analyzed.

Source: RRA Proprietary Analysis, S&P 100 Leadership Teams, 2024 (n=97 teams, 1540 executives)

Making meaningful progress for women at the top

By focusing our analysis on the top leadership team, we can move past the generalities of gender diversity in leadership toward a more substantive analysis of those with the most power and influence. Principally, this avoids the blurring of leadership levels, which can result in an overly rosy picture in which progress on gender diversity at the next generation leadership level masks the real, typically more limited level of progress at the very top.

Our findings highlight the need for an expanded consideration set for executives brought forth to become CEO, especially as women executives remain significantly underrepresented in traditional CEO feeder roles. Furthermore, gender diversity in executive leadership means more than just equal representation of men and women across C-suites. Organizations must also ensure that women brought into executive leadership roles also gain a sense of belonging and see the direct impacts of their contributions to the organization’s success.

RRA is firmly committed to elevating more women to the top job. That’s why we launched Artemis, our program designed to accelerate the development of women from the world’s most influential organizations into the CEO seat. By expediting more women to the helm as CEOs, we can collectively unlock untapped talent, co-create new CEO leadership models, and build a strong network of like-minded peers and allies who will support each other throughout their careers.

Authors

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.
Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory practice in the Americas, and is the co-founder of RRA Artemis. She is based in San Francisco.
Hetty Pye is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory practice, and is the co-founder of RRA Artemis. She is based in London.

Methodology

For our analysis, we examined the top leadership teams—as stated by the companies themselves—of the 100 largest organizations within the S&P500. We compared the composition of those teams with the US population by gender from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics. The size and nature of top leadership teams varies across organizations, ranging from 15.5 executives on average to 40 executives on the largest team and just 3 executives on the smallest team. A company’s disclosure of whom it chooses to state as part of its top leadership team is not only a factor of organizational structure, but also an indicator as to whom the company values and where power and responsibility reside.

Defining leadership teams

We analyzed 100 of the largest companies in the S&P500 (what we refer to as the “S&P100”). This includes 1,553 executives on the leadership team at these companies, which is defined using Boardex (a people intelligence data provider) and each company’s own website.

Identifying gender

Gender data comes directly from Boardex. Due to the sensitivity and complexity of this data, no data is reported on individuals and all data is analyzed and reported in the aggregate.

Mapping job/role types

Our data sources (Boardex and company websites) provide information on each executive's job title and responsibilities. However, there is a high degree of variability in that information, which is both a facet of differences in specific job titles for common functional roles and differences in organizational structures and between industries.

We designed a role categorization process whereby each executive was tagged to a specific role. In some instances, only one executive in each company could be tagged to the role, while in other instances multiple individuals could be tagged to the same role category. See the below table for more details.

Roles
Details

CEO

Multiple allowed to account for co-CEOs

CFO, CHRO, CMO, COO, GC, COO

Only one person per company listed (if role exists).

CIO/CTO

Multiple allowed in specific cases where there is a clear separation between Corporate IT (CIO) and Technology roles.

Strategy

Multiple allowed. Category includes Corporate Development. R&D and Innovation roles categorized in Product/Engineering (see below)

Commercial

Multiple allowed. Category includes merchandizing, and Customer roles (unless they have a very clear product/engineering orientation)

Other Functional Leadership

Any functional roles not caught in the above buckets. These are often sub-function roles (e.g. Treasury which is part of Finance) or roles that are just less common at this level e.g. Comms, Corporate Affairs.

Operations/Supply Chain/Logistics

Multiple allowed. Category covers supply chain roles, logistics, and operations role in banks and retail organizations etc.

Product/Engineering/Science

This category covers any roles that clearly relate to the development/creation of the product itself. Quality roles belong here as do innovation and R&D roles. In healthcare Chief Medical Officer roles live here too.

P&L Leaders

Individuals that run business units, regions or lines of business.

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsLeadership StrategiesCulture RiskDevelopment and Transition

What Aspiring C-suite Leaders Need to Know About “Being Available”

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices