Talent or Bust: Nearshoring's Key for Survival | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Talent or Bust: Nearshoring's Key for Survival

Industry TrendsConsumerIndustrialTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

September 19, 2023

8 min

Industry TrendsConsumerIndustrialTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and Benchmarking

Executive Summary

Numerous factors influence Mexico nearshoring efforts—but identifying and empowering the right leadership team is key to success.

Close

Paco Ruiz-Maza

Mexico City

Rafael Martínez Gallardo

Mexico City

Due to its industrial experience and geographic location, Mexico is a natural destination for companies looking to build resilient and highly flexible supply chains for the North American market. In fact, according to a June 2023 Morgan Stanley report, nearshoring has the potential to boost the growth of Mexican manufacturing exports to the U.S. from $455 billion today to an estimated $609 billion in the next five years.

Nearshoring:
The practice of  transferring business operations or manufacturing to a nearby country that is closer to the destination/ end consumer market.

However, all this potential will go to waste without the cultural, social, and political understanding necessary to “stick the landing” in Mexican territory, and—most importantly—an aligned leadership talent strategy.

In this report, Russell Reynolds Associates explores:

The many advantages of nearshoring in Mexico

The benefits (and challenges) of building a strong, locally-oriented C-suite

Why Mexican senior leadership is well-positioned to drive nearshoring efforts

The human factor in successfully establishing operations in Mexico

Mexico’s role in the North American Region

As part of a natural free-trade bloc, Mexico, the United States, and Canada are destined to become one of the most powerful integrated trading regions in the global economy.

In Mexico, nearshoring has grown significantly over the last four years.

Particularly in the automotive, manufacturing, aerospace, and technology sectors, original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), Tier 1, and Tier 2 companies are choosing Mexico as a nearshoring destination, due to its North American location and integration.

This integration, which had been ongoing for several years, intensified due to the Covid-19 pandemic-induced supply chain disruption, and has continued as a result of geopolitical tensions and conflicts.

Source: BofA Global Research, Banxico

While there are obstacles—including the current government’s ambivalence in certain policies—as more foreign organizations flock to the country, Mexico presents clear competitive advantages for those interested in integrating with the North American block, including:

The US-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA)

A large and long-standing automotive and manufacturing base that is highly integrated with the North American market (see below for additional details)

Macroeconomic stability

Well-positioned executive talent

Skilled labor force with competitive compensation

Overall lower costs for transporting goods

More resilient supply chains, as operations occur within a country that shares time zones, values, and perspectives with the North American market

However, successfully establishing operations in Mexico requires multiple considerations. Among them:

Choosing the best location

Understanding regulations and legal frameworks

Getting acquainted with access routes to markets of interest

Analyzing skilled workforce availability at the desired location

Considering local communities and stakeholders

Developing a well-positioned C-Suite

Deep Dive: Mexico’s significant expansion in manufacturing and the automotive industry

Under the nearshoring model, the automotive and manufacturing dynamism has had a remarkable effect.

Mexican exports of manufacturing goods have exceeded pre-pandemic levels by 73% (in US-dollars).

According to the Banco de Mexico, 16% of companies with more than 100 employees are already reporting nearshoring benefits.

Mexico's share of manufacturing imports entering the US is gradually gaining ground on China.

These figures confirm Mexico's advantage as a platform for exports, not only to the United States but also to other Latin American countries, with which it has numerous trade agreements.

Source: Haver, US Census Bureau

The challenge: building a great C-suite team

66%

of leaders in Mexico cite the availability of key talent/skills as the most pressing challenge for organizations.

Russell Reynolds Associates, H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor

We have seen it too often. A company devotes considerable time and resources to model the financials, find the “right” location, design the building and ensure supply of materials, but staffing and talent discussions are an afterthought. After all, Mexico is not so different, therefore implementing corporate decisions cannot be that hard, right? Wrong.

Nearshoring (and any) models are highly dependent on the expertise, capabilities, and resilience of the management teams executing them. Therefore, building a superior team—effective and aligned—is a mandatory component and an essential condition for achieving the desired results.

To build the best management teams, it’s crucial for organizations to:

Precisely define the type of leadership (and culture) required for the operation

Be clear about the competencies that each C-suite member should have

Understand what resources are in-house and what external resources are needed

Conduct fair hiring processes for all parties involved

Offer the right conditions (rewards, working environment, career opportunities, etc.)

Have a local ally who adds value, knows the market well, and can advise decision making processes

Local, blended, or imported C-suites: which approach is best?

Today, many companies working within (or interested in being part of) the North American supply chain are considering Mexico as a destination to establish their operations. Most of them are contemplating fiscal, location, and market issues. However, many organizations do not spend enough time planning how their C-suite will collectively function. Like any country, Mexico has particularities that leaders must take into account. Operational expertise may not yield the expected results without the right talent to navigate this market’s political, social, and cultural nuances. And while many different approaches exist, a C-suite team that knows and understands the Mexican market is crucial.

Depending on their particular style, companies interested in joining the new global supply chain scenario choose different paths when it comes to building their C-suite teams. While some prefer C-suites 100% comprised of expatriates, others would rather form mixed teams or change the mix, little by little, slowly adding executives from the host country to the management ranks.

If the organization chooses to form a purely international team, it will also need an advisory board, as the operation will be more likely to fail if its leaders disregard local context.

In general, C-suites mostly comprised of expats are not a sustainable solution, nor are they desirable in the long term. An adequate nearshoring C-suite must not only understand the company’s global strategy—it also needs to understand the domestic and local markets and know how to nimbly navigate and adapt to volatile, uncertain environments.

The Mexican senior executive: expertly positioned for nearshoring

Nearshoring to Mexico has accelerated in recent years, but it has been steadily happening over the past two decades. The good news is that companies coming in now have the advantage of being able to access a skilled talent pool with experience in multinational corporate settings.

Jaime Padilla
Industrial Practice Leader, RRA Mexico

One essential nearshoring factor to take into account is the ability of each C-suite member to understand and act in multicultural environments. It should not be forgotten that Mexico has already gone a long way in this direction.

Mexican senior executives have long term experience with multicultural corporations, especially in OEMs, Tier 1, and Tier 2 companies.

In this environment, leaders learn how to manage across many cultures. These leaders have developed the ability to work in different locations than their customers and their bosses, navigating hyper-connected environments at a distance.

Furthermore, volatility and uncertainty are the Mexican senior executive's bread and butter. It is in their DNA to stay motivated and energetic despite occasional economic setbacks.

This capability, among others, allows the integration of flexible and resilient C-suite teams capable of managing the nearshoring model in Mexico.

In Mexico, senior executives are accustomed to uncertainty, which makes them flexible in highly volatile environments. They are often able to adapt, accelerate, or pivot much more rapidly than leaders from more stable, developed economies.

Francisco Ruiz Maza
Country Manager, RRA Mexico

The key to “sticking the landing” in Mexico: The human factor

Successfully landing in Mexico depends on multiple dynamics. Perhaps most important: understanding the depth of available talent, especially at the C-level.

Ultimately, organizations should aim to build a management team that has the knowledge, skills, and flexibility to lead and align the operation with the core strategy. Partnering with an expert in this field allows you to work faster and make better decisions the first time around.

Defining the management team’s DNA is key to a successful nearshoring operation. Achieving this depends on essential recognitions, such as:

A C-suite may not be adequate if their members have not operated in Mexico before. This market requires at least some local talent.

What has worked in moving operations to other geographies may not work in Mexico, at least not to the same extent. Mexico is its own ecosystem.

Numbers, financing, and supply chain always need to align with the local context and complexities.

The most important thing, today and always, are the organization’s people and management team talent.

With this in mind, any route into a new environment should take into account that:

The skills and talents in demand for C-level executives have changed. Now, organizations seek hardy individuals with capabilities in team management, strategic thinking, financial, risk management skills, and a deep understanding of customer insights.

Flexibility and resiliency is critical for C-suite members.

In many industries, C-suite operations and supply chain roles have evolved, giving the supply chain officer a more strategic, transformational role. The right executive must exhibit evolved leadership capabilities, as well as detailed market knowledge and understandings of changing customer experiences and needs.

Integrating leaders with superior data analytics capabilities, digital mindsets, and experience in operating enterprise platforms is an indispensable differentiator. Building a leadership team capable of unlocking technology’s exponential value is a top priority.

Finally, we highly recommended forming an advisory board for Mexico operations. These advisors will help the organization’s headquarters assess the Mexican market’s particularities, while also helping them better understand Mexico as a whole. Additionally, the board can drive rich discussions with local management around the challenges and opportunities that nearshoring presents.

Authors

Jaime Padilla is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources practice. He is based in Mexico City.
Francisco Ruiz-Maza leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Mexico operations and is a senior member of the Board and CEO practice. He is based in Mexico City.
Rafael Martínez Gallardo is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Digital Technology practice. He is based in Mexico City.

Talent or Bust: Nearshoring's Key for Survival

Download full article

Connect with our experts

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices