Instilling Sustainability into CEO Succession | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Instilling Sustainability into CEO Succession

Board and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Article

Clarke Murphy

January 05, 2024

4 min

Board and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Sustainability is a leading issue of our time. We set out how to embed sustainable competencies within your succession plans—including a key skill to prioritize.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

This article originally appeared on Directors and Boards.

Choosing a new CEO is one of the most important responsibilities that a board faces. Arguably, no other decision will have such a profound effect on an organization’s long-term performance.

But what it takes to succeed as a CEO is changing—and succession plans will likely need to change, too. The skills that may have been prioritized in the past are unlikely to be enough to help organizations navigate a fast-changing world.

The industry has seen demand increase for a new type of business leader—one who doesn’t just deliver financial performance, but who also makes the long-term sustainability and resilience of our world a top priority.

We need leaders who can address the full gamut of sustainability challenges, including environmental, community, labor and regulatory issues.

The payoff of finding, developing and elevating these types of leaders within an organization’s ranks is significant. Not only is there growing evidence that sustainable practices enhance reputation and create value, but there’s also mounting pressure from investors, employees and customers for organizations to play a role in addressing environmental and societal challenges.

In other words, it’s never been more important to get sustainability right. And with that, it’s never been more important for organizations to ensure they have the right leaders at the helm who can activate sustainability, at scale.

The Sustainability Skills Gap

Real change happens fastest when it is led from the top. It is the CEO’s role to infuse sustainability throughout an entire organization—from strategy and operations to mobilizing the C-suite and frontline employees into action. The CEO is the engine, the only person with the power to accelerate wholesale organizational transformation.

In recent research with 3,800 leaders from around the world, 76% of senior executives said their CEO is personally committed to supporting and advancing sustainability, up from 51% two years ago.

This is heartening progress. But it’s also true that commitment alone isn’t enough. It is bold leadership that ultimately fosters a culture of sustainability and translates vision into action.

Recent work with the United Nations Global Compact identified a set of differentiating leadership attributes that fuel sustainable leaders’ success. It starts with a sustainable mindset—the purpose-driven belief that a business is intricately linked to its wider social and environmental context—alongside four critical capabilities: multilevel systems thinking, stakeholder inclusion, long-term activation and disruptive innovation.

When leaders were asked whether their CEO demonstrated these skills, they scored relatively well on multilevel systems thinking, stakeholder inclusion and long-term activation, but they often lacked disruptive innovation skills. In fact, only 50% of leaders felt their CEO possessed this capability.

Why Disruptive Innovation Is Key

To move the dial on sustainability progress, CEOs must go beyond small, incremental changes. It’s important for organizations to have leaders at the helm who are disruptive innovators, who feel confident setting bold and ambitious targets and who are daring in their approach to advancing sustainability progress.

Being a disruptive innovator will inevitably have a positive knock-on effect, too. If CEOs can create a culture of experimentation, where ingenuity and innovation are applauded, leaders are more likely to feel empowered to find creative solutions to problems and feel confident challenging the status quo.

This isn’t just theory. Data shows that senior leaders who felt their CEO was a disruptive innovator were three times more likely to report that sustainability progress has been made and will continue to be made at their organization.

How to Identify a Disruptive Innovator

As a CEO succession strategy progresses, it’s critical to ensure sustainable leadership competencies are hard-baked into future CEO profiles. This includes zeroing in on leaders who are strong on disruptive innovation competencies. As a starting point, it’s good practice to consider the following factors:

Are they confident asking tough questions? Look for leaders who are unafraid to ask, ‘Why can’t this be done differently?’ The best sustainable leaders will be comfortable disrupting their organization and industry, steadied by the belief that it will unlock a better future for all.

Are they able to learn from failure? Look for leaders who feel confident trying something new — and, most importantly, are able to learn from failures. A CEO who can get their leadership team to think differently, disrupt the status quo and be open-minded to innovative ideas is key.

Are they comfortable in the unknown? Look for leaders who are comfortable forging ahead, even when they don’t have all the answers. The best CEOs will have the faith, determination and long-term view that whatever piece of the puzzle they’re missing will be found through creative problem-solving with internal or external partners.

Prioritizing these capabilities when looking for your next CEO will pay dividends: Research (and experience) shows these leaders are more likely not only to accelerate sustainability progress today but also to develop the next generation of leaders who can carry the mantle forward for the long haul. The opportunity to accelerate progress, at scale, then becomes exponential.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices