Collaborating for Growth: First-Turn Portfolio Companies and Executive Search | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Collaborating for Growth: First-Turn Portfolio Companies and Executive Search

FinanceGrowth and ScalingFinance OfficersHuman Resources OfficersCustomer Activation and GrowthOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Article

March 11, 2024

5 min

FinanceGrowth and ScalingFinance OfficersHuman Resources OfficersCustomer Activation and GrowthOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Ensuring a seamless search process for first-turn portfolio companies and PE firms, many of which are new to partnering with search firms.

Close

Linda Barham

Chicago

Mike Heberlein

Minneapolis - St Paul

Ted Moore

Chicago

For first-turn portfolio companies—companies that are typically founder-led and partnering with a private equity firm for the first time—the experience of working with an executive search firm often varies. Founders are often new to partnering with search firms, as they have mostly hired through their networks. While PE firms want to hire world-class talent and are focused on value creation through their hold cycle, the founder’s priorities lean more towards hiring a strong executive for today, who fits into the organization’s culture.

Through interviews with private equity firms invested in first-turn portfolio companies and their founders, Russell Reynolds Associates outlines key lessons learned and tactical recommendations on how to ensure a seamless search process that aligns stakeholders and empowers founders. These include:

Key first hires: What are the most common first hires and how do their profiles vary?

Ensuring a seamless search process: What do successful searches have in common?

Partnering for success: From search kick-off to offer, a search checklist and charter.

Key First Hires

In the early days, founders often had Swiss-army knife executives. However, as the organization scales, executives need to evolve along with the organization. Founders often remain on as CEO, and the focus is on hiring roles that complement the founder and existing management team’s skillset.

When defining the profiles of the key first hires, sketch out the organizational chart for what you want the company to look like at 3-4x its current size. While these first hires vary based on the existing team, common first hires and profiles include:

A COO who can hire and organize the company at the projected growth size

A first-turn COO is pivotal to scaling business operations and ensuring organizational resilience, while also complementing the gaps of the founding team as they scale.

COO Competencies

Systems and Infrastructure Developer

Engineers robust operational systems to support scalability and efficient company-wide processes.

Oversees the development of infrastructure that supports both immediate operational needs and long-term growth.

Scalability and Growth Orchestrator

Plans and manages the organization's operational scalability to handle increased production, team expansion, and market growth.

Synchronizes cross-departmental efforts to ensure consistent and sustainable growth, aligning with the company's strategic objectives.

Performance and Quality Optimizer

Implements performance metrics and quality control systems to maintain high standards during rapid growth.

Drives initiatives for continuous improvement and operational excellence, ensuring the organization's output meets market demands.

Strategic Execution Leader

Translates the company's strategic plan into actionable operational goals, ensuring alignment across all departments.

Monitors the execution of strategies, making data-driven decisions to adjust operations and drive efficient workflow management.

A CFO who can build the foundations on which to scale

The ideal first-turn CFO profile meets the portfolio company where they are at in their journey and scales along with them.

CFO Competencies

Finance Fundamentals

Able to stand up and professionalize the finance function. Deep experience in classic finance functions including accounting, reporting, compliance, controls, and control frameworks.

Hands-On Approach

Ability to roll up their sleeves and get into the weeds. Working proactively and closely with the finance and leadership team.

Finance Transformation

Evolves the finance function and operating model as the firm’s business model changes. Drives attention towards value-adding finance activities by ensuring finance and accounting operations are efficient and effective.

Growth Guru

Provides leadership on M&A, profitable growth, and acquiring capital. Deep expertise in financial engineering and structuring complex transactions.

Strategic Partner

Provides leadership in aligning financial, business and investment strategies. Sets the future direction of the company to enhance business performance. Can be a potential CEO successor.

A CHRO who can define the talent management strategy

The ideal first-turn CHRO profile is pivotal to scaling the workforce, developing talent, and helping to solidify culture as the organization grows.

CHRO Competencies

Culture and Talent Catalyst

Focuses on developing and advancing a culture that embodies the organization’s values, driving high performance and inclusivity.

Oversees talent management and acquisition for strategic workforce scaling and continuous improvement.

People Strategy Visionary

Aligns HR development needs with the firms core long term development strategy to support organizational growth and adaptability in changing markets.

Learning and Development Innovator

Focuses on continuous development across all levels of the organization; not only ensuring that the workforce scales but also fostering an environment of growth for the entire c-suite.

Operational Excellence and Total Rewards Strategist

Streamlines and implements operational improvements and total reward strategies to attract, retain, and motivate top talent effectively.

A CRO/Sales Officer who can drive revenue growth

The CRO/CSO is critical in aligning sales operations with the organization’s broader strategic goals and driving repeatable growth at scale.

CRO/CSO Competencies

Market Expansion Leader

Identifies new market opportunities and sets revenue targets while gaining support for a company-wide go-to-market vision.

Drives the expansion efforts to capitalize on global and local trends, ensuring the organization's offerings remain competitive.

Sales Process Architect

Designs and implements robust sales processes to maximize efficiency and effectiveness across the sales cycle.

Ensures that the sales infrastructure can support scaling efforts and adapts to the evolving needs of the organization.

Customer Acquisition Expert

Develops and oversees strategies for customer acquisition and retention, focusing on increasing the customer base and ensuring long-term loyalty.

Leverages analytics and customer insights to refine sales tactics and improve the overall customer journey.

Revenue Optimization Strategist

Formulates and executes strategies for revenue optimization, including pricing, packaging, and positioning of products and services.

Works closely with marketing, product development, and customer success teams to ensure a cohesive approach to revenue growth.

Ensuring a seamless search process

Transparency, balancing stakeholders, and access to data are fundamental to partnering with an executive search firm. Through our interviews, we found that successful searches excelled at the following:

Taking time to understand the search process
With first-turn portfolio companies, this may often be the first time the founder and management team have partnered with an executive search team. In tandem with the private equity firm, we need to ensure founders invest the time to align on the value of the process, the market, role archetypes, non-negotiable core competencies, and what great talent looks like.

Balancing stakeholders
Balancing the relationship between private equity firms and founders can be challenging. The dynamics can vary depending on the type of investor and their involvement in the company. While private equity firms tend to want to hire world-class talent and are focused on value creation through their hold cycle, the founder’s priorities lean more towards hiring a strong executive today with a culture fit.

Striking a balance means focusing on candidates who can complement the founder’s skillset and reach the required level of scalability.

Leveraging organizational data
Early access to organizational data, such as revenue, EBITDA, CAGR, and perspectives around future MOIC and valuation of the business, can impact the quality of the search.

Being open and transparent about key financial metrics, growth targets, and the investment thesis can help attract high-caliber candidates.

Perfecting the pitch
The earlier we understand the organization’s topline, growth, investment thesis, and compensation philosophy, the better. As a search firm, understanding the story we are bringing to the market will help calibrate the talent profile we are after.

Navigating compensation challenges
Founders may have sticker shock when comparing their cash compensation to the market, so understanding that the equity and long-term value creation these executives will help drive can help keep everyone aligned and motivated.

That said, it is important to have early discussions about compensation expectations, especially the equity component, and provide real-time market data to calibrate profiles and show the value of the offer. The portfolio companies having a clear compensation philosophy and understanding the market will be crucial.

Partnering for Success: Search checklist and charter

Russell Reynolds Associates always strives for an open and thorough search kick-off. To best understand a client’s needs, we come prepared to discuss the organization’s ethos, culture, and challenges, in addition to the role itself, so we can best partner to tell the organization’s story. A site visit can often accelerate the process and answer key questions such as:

What is the company’s story?

What are the top two to three responsibilities for this role?

What problem they will be tasked with solving?

How is the sponsor driving value?

Whether it's partnering with a search firm for the first time, or kicking off a search with your latest portfolio company, use the below as a charter to help navigate the search process and make the most out of your partnership with RRA in landing the right candidate.

Partnering for success: Search checklist and charter

Opening the Search

☐ Provide all relevant presentation materials, including the investment strategy, executive team overview, functional team org structure, and the 3-5-year organizational strategy.

☐ Outline and gather early compensation and equity valuation projections, these are particularly helpful selling points.

☐ Align on work structure must-haves early on (e.g., in-person versus hybrid work).

Outline Roles & Responsibilities

☐ Define the level of involvement from the founder, PE firm, and broader executive teams.

☐ Identify your jury members early on and the order in which they should meet candidates (e.g., does the founder vet the candidate first or does the PE firm?)

Defining the Success Profile

☐ What do the first 12-18 months look like for your executive hire? This will help inform the profile we target.

☐ Be open to market expertise and thoughtful about the existing management team’s strengths, these will help inform potential trade-offs (e.g., a strong COO might be able to support a first-time CFO).

☐ Ensure there is a common understanding of the relevant industries we should be targeting.

Landing the Candidate

☐ To keep things moving, keep your commitments to the weekly status calls, provide timely and detailed feedback on candidates, and play an active role in referencing when needed.

☐ Leverage assessments, not only in helping to identify the right candidate, but also to inform how to best onboard and work with the candidate.

☐ As you approach the offer stage, align your roles to ensure a coordinated effort in the delivery of the offer.

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice in the Americas. She is based in Chicago.
Mike Heberlein is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers practice. He is based in Minneapolis.
Ted Moore leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ HR Officers practice. He is based in Chicago.
Catherine Schroeder leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

Collaborating for Growth: First-Turn Portfolio Companies and Executive Search

Download full article

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices