Embracing the Unknown: How Leaders Engage with Generative AI in the Face of Uncertainty | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Embracing the Unknown: How Leaders Engage with Generative AI in the Face of Uncertainty

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

January 22, 2024

7 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

With the speed at which the market is responding to GenAI, many leaders are making decisions about the tech without fully understanding it.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Tristan Jervis

London

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

Feeling uncertain about generative AI? You aren’t alone.

Generative AI refers to the subfield of artificial intelligence that is capable of generating text, images, or other media. This is done via foundational models, which generate output from one or more inputs (prompts) in the form of human language instructions. Models are based on complex neural networks including generative adversarial networks (GANs), transformers, and variational encoders.

Since ChatGPT launched in late 2022, generative AI (GenAI) has been framed as a tool that will change everything, especially the way we work. While AI adoption has varied among organizations to date, GenAI has brought the barrier of adoption to an extraordinarily reachable place. Yet while 72% of leaders globally agree that “a strong understanding of generative AI will be a required skill for future C-suite members,” new Russell Reynolds data finds that only 32% leaders are confident in their own ability to implement AI in their organizations today.

This gap puts tangible numbers to what we’ve heard from leaders globally in the market: while they know that GenAI is crucial to the future of their business, most leaders feel unprepared to deploy the technology or assess its long term impacts.

What’s more, when we look at the ratio of leaders who have taken steps to implement GenAI to those who have not, we see similar percentages—71% of leaders report having taken at least one step towards bringing the tool into their function or team’s workflow, with 33% in the initial “investigated” phase, 12% in the “developed” phase, 20% in the “piloted” phase, and just 7% in the “implemented” phase. On the other hand, 29% of leaders have taken no action (Figure 1). These parallels suggest that leaders are letting personal comfort dictate their organization’s AI strategy.

Figure 1: Leaders’ progress in their generative AI implementation journeys

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,038 CEOs, C-level leaders, and next generation leaders.

To better understand how leaders are responding to GenAI—and how that outlook will impact organizations long term—Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed over 2,500 leaders via our H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, determining how leaders view their own GenAI expertise, the ways they’re using these tools, and their confidence in their organization’s ability to embrace them.

Most leaders have minimal knowledge of GenAI—but are taking steps to implement it anyway

About half of leaders say they have “minimal knowledge” of GenAI, having experimented with the technology but possessing limited experience implementing it (Figure 2). This was the most frequently selected level of familiarity, with approximately one-third of leaders reporting limited to no knowledge of GenAI, and only 2% identifying as experts who have successfully implemented several GenAI solutions.

Figure 2: Leaders’ familiarity and knowledge around generative AI

% of leaders rating their familiarity and knowledge around generative AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 1,321 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders, and board directors

This is compounded by the fact that 55% of leaders name “knowledge and expertise” as a barrier to implementing these tools, making it the most selected concern (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Top barriers for leaders implementing generative AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 1,287 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders, and board directors

The farther along an organization is in its GenAI implementation journey, the less likely its leaders are to name knowledge and expertise as a top barrier to implementation. In fact, 62% of leaders who have not implemented GenAI and 57% of those in the initial investigation phase name knowledge and expertise as a top barrier, while leaders in the developed, piloted, or fully implemented phases are more likely to point to data governance and quality as top challenges (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Top 3 barriers to implementing GenAI, split by stage in implementation journey

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 1,287 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders, and board directors

As GenAI continues to evolve, all the barriers listed above merit serious consideration and scenario-planning as leaders develop and implement their generative AI strategy. Particular attention should be paid to the items that may feel less pressing now, but carry massive long-term risks if they do appear—including accuracy of outputs, ethics violations, bias perpetuation, and skill erosion.

Leaders aren’t optimistic about their organization’s ability to engage with GenAI

Despite the fact that most leaders have begun their GenAI implementation journeys, only 38% agree that their organizations have forward-thinking leadership who align resources to harness the power of the technology. Surprisingly, CEOs and next generation leaders are equally lacking in confidence, with only 36% of both groups feeling positive about their leadership’s capabilities (Figure 5).

Leaders are even less likely to feel confident in their workforce’s AI expertise, with 32% of CEOs and 29% of C-level executives agreeing that their organization has employees with the right technical skills to implement GenAI solutions.

Overall, leaders are most pessimistic regarding board members’ ability to embrace GenAI, with only 21% of CEOs agreeing that their board has the right expertise to advise on GenAI implementation.

Figure 5: Leaders views on leadership, board members, and employees’ abilities to embrace generative AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 1,297 CEO, C-level, next generation leaders, and board directors

It’s worth noting that board members are most likely to feel positive about leaders’, employees’, and even their own abilities to embrace GenAI. This is consistent with our Leadership Confidence Index, which observes that board members tend to be more confident in their executive leadership teams’ abilities than leaders at other levels. The disconnect between board and executive perceptions may be due to board members taking a broader, long-term view, or because they’re removed from the day-to-day of business functions. In this case, it may also be due to a lack of familiarity with GenAI themselves. Regardless, it's crucial for board directors to be equally aware of GenAI’s implications and their organization’s preparedness to face them.

Leaders are personally engaging with AI—to an extent

Leaders are most likely to have engaged with a generative AI tool to 1) stay updated with current trends and developments, 2) gain familiarity with complex concepts more quickly, and 3) to solve a specific business challenge (Figure 6). On average, leaders selected 2.23 items from the list below, meaning they are experimenting with the technology in multiple ways.

Approximately one out of five leaders say they have never used generative AI.

Figure 6: How leaders are personally engaging with generative AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 1,103 CEO, C-level, and next generation leaders

I think the most important thing that leaders can appreciate is that, while AI has evolved to this moment in the hype cycle, it’s going to become central to how businesses operate. As a leader, the best thing you can do is better familiarize yourselves with the opportunities—as well as the limitations—that exist with the technology. To achieve this, leaders need a learning mindset and the ability to embrace ambiguity.”

Joe Ghory
Russell Reynolds Associates

How to build confidence around a balanced AI strategy

We’ve yet to uncover all the long term ways GenAI will alter and enhance how we work and lead. As with every tech leap, leaders need to thoughtfully engage with new tools and their associated skillsets before they can expect positive results. While a small fraction of leaders are using GenAI as often as they open their email, most are still determining how best to engage with these tools. And with the speed at which the market is responding to generative AI, many leaders are making decisions about the technology without fully understanding it.

That’s nerve wracking. We know this pressure multiplies for leaders making decisions that impact employees, stakeholders, and the future of their organization. And when only 2% of leaders identify as GenAI experts, there simply isn’t enough expertise to go around (for now.)

During times of accelerated technological advancement, we’ve seen organizations fail when they:

Dive into implementation before fully understanding the technology’s implications for their business

Develop a detailed, organization-wide roadmap that gets bogged down by stakeholders, leading to inaction

Create tech and policy without defining clear use cases that align with the organization’s culture and its openness to innovation

Instead, organizations that take measured steps to implement new technologies in strategic areas of the business that have a specific use for the tools—and the appetite to experiment with them—find the most success.

To help leaders develop this type of balanced approach, we identified five key areas to help CEOs, boards, and senior technology leaders navigate its impact on their organizations, as well as questions they can use to gain familiarity and structure conversations around their implementation strategy.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.

George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.

Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in London.

Tuck Rickards is a senior member and former leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in San Francisco.

The authors wish to thank the 2,500+ leaders from RRA’s global network who completed the 2023 Global Leadership Monitor Fall Pulse. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2024 and beyond.

Embracing the Unknown

How Leaders Engage with Generative AI in the Face of Uncertainty

Download here

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices