Operations & Supply Chain Leaders’ GenAI Adventures: Bridging the Knowledge Gap | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Operations & Supply Chain Leaders’ GenAI Adventures: Bridging the Knowledge Gap

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationCareer AdviceTransformation and InnovationLeadershipConsumerIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 1 author

March 04, 2024

7 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationCareer AdviceTransformation and InnovationLeadershipConsumerIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Are you implementing GenAI in operations and supply chain? Our research uncovers significant knowledge and skills gaps across organizational levels.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

The speed of generative AI (GenAI) development and adoption has been extraordinary. While several studies show high GenAI adoption rates for operations and supply chain, Russell Reynolds Associates wanted to better understand where these leaders are in their implementation journey, what actions they have prioritized, and where their teams are facing hurdles.

To accomplish this, we analyzed results from our H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, examining C-suite operations and supply chain leaders’ views on and progress with GenAI implementation. We found that—while implementing GenAI is a strategic priority for most organizations—operations and supply chain teams are facing significant knowledge and skills gaps across organizational levels, which is hindering implementation efforts.

GenAI: A strategic priority backed by CEOs

GenAI is undoubtedly a strategic priority, and there is ample CEO support. According to an EY survey of 1,200 global CEOs in October 2023, 99% of the respondents are making or planning significant investments in GenAI, and 70% are accelerating investments to maintain a competitive advantage. To finance these investments, 69% of CEOs are reallocating capital from other investment projects or technology budgets, while 23% are securing new capital.1  These commitments are reflected in planned budgets for 2024: according to a Gartner survey, chief supply chain officers are allocating a notable 5.8% of their budgets to GenAI along with incremental employee spend to deploy this technology.2

However, for many organizations, the speed at which the market is responding to GenAI also poses an increased risk. C-suite operations and supply chain leaders are increasingly concerned about the risk of technological change to their organizations and feel less prepared to respond than a year ago (Figure 1). While these changes point to technologies more broadly, the rapid development of GenAI is likely a significant contributor to shifting sentiments.

Figure 1: Technological change threat and operations and supply chain leadership preparedness

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 150 (H2 2023), N = 86 (H2 2022) C-level Operations and Supply Chain leaders.

From exploration to implementation: Mapping the GenAI journey

Our Monitor shows that 78% of operations and supply chain teams have taken at least one step towards implementing GenAI. While these adoption rates may seem high at the surface, only a small segment (9%) of these organizations have fully implemented a GenAI solution and are using it in their day-to-day workflow. Most leaders (41%) are still in the investigation phase (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Where are operations and supply chain functions in their GenAI implementation journey?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 47 C-level Operations and Supply Chain leaders.

While the majority of operations and supply chain organizations are still in the early stages of their GenAI journey, there are several organizations working on solutions driving significant efficiency and quality improvements. Examples of those include Wendy's, Mercedes-Benz and Carrefour:

Wendy’s

The fast-food chain has partnered with Google to automate its drive-through service, which takes up to 80% of all its food orders. The goal is to streamline the ordering process with GenAI-powered chatbots and reduce drive-through lines. This is not an easy task—these tools must understand unique terms, phrases and acronyms customers use, different dialects and accents, changes in orders, and extraneous noise—but test results has been favorable. According to Wendy’s Chief Information Officer, Kevin Vasconi, “it’s at least as good as our best customer service representative, and it’s probably on average better.”3

Mercedes-Benz

The German automaker started testing ChatGPT in its production process, including quality management, in July 2023. Within its factories, ChatGPT will introduce a voice-based interface that enables employees without programming backgrounds to utilize data analysis tools and assess process production data. Following a successful pilot, the firm plans to roll out ChatGPT in its manufacturing sites globally.4

Carrefour

The European retailer is leveraging GenAI and process mining to transform its procurement processes. In a successful proof of concept, the company has implemented ChatGPT to streamline the comparison of procurement quotes, leading to significant efficiency improvements. Tasks that previously took 30 minutes are now taking only 10 minutes to complete.5

Closing the gap: Overcoming knowledge and skill barriers in GenAI implementation

As with every emerging trend, there are challenges. Our Monitor shows poor data quality, knowledge and skills, and data security as top barriers to GenAI implementation (Figure 3). These are evident to leadership: only 17% of surveyed C-suite operations and supply chain leaders believe their organization has employees with the right technical skills required to implement generative AI solutions. And like Doug McMillon, Walmart CEO, put it, “ultimately, the power of generative AI or any technology is only as good as the data that powers it.”6  Given that the cost of implementation is a low ranking barrier (only 29% selected), implementation budget doesn’t seem to be a concern for most operations and supply chain leaders.

Figure 3: Top 10 barriers in GenAI implementation for C-suite operations and supply chain leaders

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 47 C-level Operations and Supply Chain leaders.

This knowledge and skills gap applies equally to C-suites. While 72% of these operations and supply chain leaders believe a strong understanding of generative AI will be a required skill for future C-suite members, only 14% have a basic to strong knowledge of the technology (Figure 4). Given that 85% of surveyed C-suite operations and supply chain leaders have minimal to no knowledge about GenAI, majority of leaders are making decisions about this technology without properly understanding it.

Figure 4: How C-suite operations and supply chain leaders describe their familiarity and knowledge around GenAI?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ H2 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, N = 50 C-level Operations and Supply Chain leaders. Due to rounding, total does not sum to 100%.

While data quality and security are crucial to address, notable knowledge and skill gaps across organizational levels increase implementation risks and prevent operations and supply chain functions from fully benefiting from the momentum. Establishing training and development at all levels and investing in reskilling and hiring should be a priority. According to Boston Consulting Group, the effort devoted to business and people transformation—including activities such as business process redesign, change management, upskilling, and leadership development—will likely be greater for generative AI versus traditional AI implementation.7

Schneider Electric embraced a human-centric approach in their GenAI transformation, involving stakeholders company-wide from the start. Through 56 workshops over four weeks, they engaged over 200 internal stakeholders from 15 functions. Experts in AI and technology collaborated with business executives to raise awareness, co-create opportunities, and inspire employees.8

Driving success in GenAI implementations: Prioritizing knowledge and skills across employees and leadership

While there are early adopters, the majority of operations and supply chain organizations are still in the initial stages of their implementation journey. Additionally, these organizations are facing several barriers, including a notable knowledge and skills gap. With this in mind, CEOs and C-suite operations and supply chain leaders should consider the following:

Cultivate and attract talent: Investing in employee training and development plans focused on GenAI will enable existing employees to upskill and adapt to the changing technological landscape. Additionally, expanding responsibilities among existing roles and talent can help distribute the workload and foster a culture of innovation and collaboration. In addition to training and development, operations and supply chain functions should prioritize recruiting. The competitive market for GenAI skillsets poses a challenge—particularly within operations and supply chain, which may not receive the same level of strategic recognition as other functions.

Address the knowledge gap among senior leaders: It is evident that there is a lack of knowledge and skills when it comes to GenAI, and many C-suite operations and supply chain leaders feel uncomfortable with the technology, which hinders its implementation. To overcome this, organizations should invest in educational initiatives to provide these leaders with the necessary understanding and confidence to drive GenAI development in their functions.

With only 4% of C-suite operations and supply chain leaders identifying as GenAI experts, recruiting executives with necessary knowledge and skills is going to be a challenge. The successful implementation of GenAI requires leaders who can make educated decisions about this technology and/or guide and oversee implementation. Partnering with an executive search firm can help identify and attract top talent with the necessary combination of skills and experience.

By addressing knowledge gaps, cultivating talent, and strategically acquiring skilled employees and executives, organizations can navigate the challenges and capitalize on the opportunities presented by GenAI across their operations and supply chains.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in the Americas and AI practice, Globally. He is based in Toronto.

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Dallas.

Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.

Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.

Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.

References

1 EY. November 8, 2023. CEOs bet big on generative AI to gain competitive edge despite hurdles to adoption and M&A challenges. https://www.ey.com/en_ie/news/2023/11/ceos-bet-big-on-generative-ai-to-gain-competitive-edge-despite-hurdles-to-adoption-and-m-a-challenges

2 Gartner. January 10, 2024. Gartner Survey Shows Half of Supply Chain Organizations Plan to Implement GenAI in the Next 12 Months. https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2024-01-10-gartner-survey-shows-half-of-supply-chain-organizations-plan-to-implement-genai-in-the-next-twelve-months

3 Angus Loten. May 9, 2023. Wendy’s, Google Train Next-Generation Order Taker: an AI Chatbot. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/wendys-google-train-next-generation-order-taker-an-ai-chatbot-968ff865

4 Kate Magill. July 19, 2023. Mercedes-Benz brings ChatGPT to factories. Supply Chain Dive. https://www.supplychaindive.com/news/mercedes-benz-chat-gpt-auto-factories/688355/

5 Bill Detwiler. December 22, 2023. Retailer Carrefour is transforming procurement with a process approach to generative AI. Celonis. https://www.celonis.com/blog/retailer-carrefour-is-transforming-procurement-with-a-process-approach-to-generative-ai/

6 Roberto Torres. August 21, 2023. Walmart’s AI push prioritizes customer experience, personalization. Retail Dive. https://www.retaildive.com/news/walmart-AI-customer-experience/691263/#:~:text=from%20your%20inbox.-,Walmart%27s%20AI%20push%20prioritizes%20customer%20experience%2C%20personalization,CEO%20Doug%20McMillon%20said%20Thursday

7 Vinciane Beauchene et al. November 8, 2023. Schneider Electric’s Journey to a Generative AI Future. BCG. https://www.bcg.com/publications/2023/energy-management-company-journey-to-generative-ai-future

8 Vinciane Beauchene et al. November 8, 2023. Schneider Electric’s Journey to a Generative AI Future. BCG. https://www.bcg.com/publications/2023/energy-management-company-journey-to-generative-ai-future

Operations & Supply Chain Leaders’ GenAI Adventures: Bridging the Knowledge Gap

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices