Why public tech CEOs are turning over, fast—and how companies should plan for succession | Russel Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why public tech CEOs are turning over, fast—and how companies should plan for succession

Technology and InnovationTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Article

Tuck Rickards

November 20, 2023

3 min

Technology and InnovationTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This year is yielding an unprecedented level of turnover among CEOs within the tech industry. Companies must plan for this eventuality.

Close

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

If current trends continue, 2023 will yield the highest public tech company CEO turnover rate of the past three years, with a meaningfully higher rate than 2022.

Leveraging their Global CEO Turnover Index, executive search and leadership advisory firm Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed more than 650 of the largest global public tech companies (sized at least $500 million in revenue) and found that 69 CEOs stepped down in 2022. This year, CEO turnover accelerated–the number of CEOs who have stepped down was already nearly the same (63) by the end of Q2 in 2023. With a projected total of 88 by year’s end, the uptick of CEO transitions this year far surpasses rates of any recent years, save 2021, when global economic downturn as a result of the pandemic led to an abnormal rate of turnover.

Navigating a dynamic environment

What is causing this accelerated rate of turnover? “As the tech markets tightened at the end of 2022, boards were closely evaluating whether they had the right CEO to lead their company through more disciplined and profitable growth,” noted Tuck Rickards, Russell Reynolds’ managing director and global technology sector leader. “We are in an environment where companies that were built for growth-at-all costs were not necessarily prepared for this more execution-oriented environment.” As a result, boards have been making changes at the top.

Rickards predicts that this trend will continue into 2024. While the market is picking up momentum, there is even more pressure on CEOs to deliver on performance. Boards are now looking to accelerate growth and take market share while also grappling with the next wave of tech disruption, such as generative AI. These trends are sure to continue, putting additional strain on CEOs and leadership teams.

So what should tech companies and their boards do to plan for and navigate this difficult market environment? Rickards offers some guidance:

1. Make sure your CEO has the skill sets needed for the next chapter of growth.

It’s important that boards have thought carefully about the ideal “future CEO success profile,” and that current and future CEOs have the experience required to deliver on the strategic and financial objectives of the business, says Rickards. Tech companies are making specific decisions to bring on board new CEOs that “spike” in desired areas, such as go-to-market, strategic product and scaled operations.

2. Develop internal candidates while keeping eyes on the best external candidates in the market.

Proactive succession planning is key to long-term value creation and success, and historically, tech companies have not had robust CEO succession planning. Tech companies are organized functionally and do not always have obvious GMs as internal succession candidates. For this reason, explains Rickards, it’s especially important for tech companies to develop internal talent that can work across functions; and equally important for boards to have a process to regularly benchmark their leadership teams against external CEO and C-Suite talent.

3. Stay engaged as a board.

Boards are playing increasingly hands-on roles in demanding more prioritization and operational rigor, notes Rickards. Forward-thinking tech companies are ensuring that they have the right composition of board directors, including proven CEOs, QFEs, and commercial leaders who can be valuable resources to guide and advise senior leadership teams. Having experienced CEOs and operators on boards also helps mitigate risk and deal with unforeseen events, including abrupt CEO and leadership team transitions.

4. Make sure you have the right team in place to operate effectively.

In this more demanding operating environment, it is critical that tech companies have the right leaders in each function and that they are operating effectively as a team, says Rickards. Having senior leadership working seamlessly together takes some pressure off the CEO, who is already being increasingly scrutinized for performance and results.

A pragmatic, yet optimistic assessment

Capital markets are ruthless and efficient, but the technology industry is a dynamic and resilient one. With thoughtful succession planning, Rickards believes that tech companies can withstand CEO turnover and even emerge better for it.  The moves that boards have made over this past year will position their organizations well for future success. Problems occur when companies are not planning ahead and are caught off-guard, introducing unnecessary disruption and risk.

Authors

Robert Alexander is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. He is based in New York City.
Jemi Crookes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. She is based in Washington D.C.
Tuck Rickards leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice and is an Executive Board member at Fast Company. He is based in San Francisco.

This article was originally published by Fast Company.

SuccessionCEO SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionCulture AnalyticsTeam Performance

Seven Steps to Successful CEO Succession

Inclusive LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

The Imperfect CEO

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices