Next Generation Advisory Boards: A Trending Solution for Bridging the Tech Talent Gap | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Next Generation Advisory Boards: A Trending Solution for Bridging the Tech Talent Gap

Technology and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

+ 1 author

November 20, 2023

8 min

Technology and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

How are organizations tackling technology and AI disruption? We look at Tech Advisory Boards as a tool to attract tech expertise.

Close

Tristan Jervis

London

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

James Roome

London

Nicolas Schwartz

Paris

In an era where technology evolves faster than corporate strategies can adapt, organizations often focus on how to attract technology expertise. While technology dangles the offer of unprecedented growth and innovation, navigating this landscape requires more than just traditional wisdom—it demands a specialized compass, and vast expertise and talent to deploy.

Enter the Tech Advisory Board – an existing concept that is fast becoming a contemporary answer to age-old challenges around receiving cutting-edge technology guidance without relying on a new roster of technology leaders. A tech advisory board provides non-binding strategic guidance and expertise in the digital and technology domain. They typically feature industry experts, thought leaders, and professionals with deep knowledge of technology, market trends, and emerging technologies. Meeting several times a year, a tech advisory board is there to help organizations navigate the complex digital landscape, develop effective digital strategies, target companies for acquisition, and stay ahead of the competition.

This paper delves into the rising phenomenon of tech advisory boards, why they might become the vogue among leading organizations, and how to effectively institute them to ensure your business remains at the cutting edge of the digital age.

Why set up a tech advisory board?

There are many benefits of having a tech advisory board. These benefits generally fall into three main categories:

Embracing technology

Tackling disruption             The advisory board’s non-binding advice allows organizations to explore new strategies without the constraints of traditional decision-making processes.

Supporting digital maturity              The advisory board enables firm-wide technology goals by guiding digital transformation and long-term technology projects.

Enhancing agility and transformation efforts             Advisory board’s flexible nature allows for quick membership changes, making it easier to bring in new expertise or address specific challenges.

External connectivity

Accessing wider networks              Advisory board members provide access to a wider network, facilitating strategic partnerships, collaborations, joint ventures, and greater market presence.

Introducing new perspectives              An advisory board supports strategies for getting ahead of technology disruption and finding innovative solutions to organizational challenges.

Talent management

Filling skills gaps             Advisory boards bring perspectives and skills that the organization's current board and leadership team may lack or not fully grasp.

Succession planning             Advisory board members gain valuable experience that could make them future candidates for the organization’s board.

Providing a learning forum             The advisory board acts as a learning forum and sounding board for innovative ideas, fostering a culture of innovation and continuous learning.

Who could sit on a tech advisory board?

A tech advisory board should be more than a group of chief technology officers. Bringing together people with a variety of digital expertise will make the advisory board more effective.

Technology company leaders
A CEO or senior general manager of a technology organization would bring commercial leadership and an understanding of the technology ecosystem.

Chief information or technology officer
A technology executive can bring an understanding of the functional technology landscape, from architecture and infrastructure to data and cyber security.

Chief digital or product officer
A digital executive can help understand technology use cases, both internally for automation and efficiencies and externally for customer engagement and revenue generation.

Founder or scaling start-up leader
A digitally-native leader can bring the agility and vision to stay ahead of the market during periods of rapid technology development.

Research and development lead
An expert in ideating, incubating, and scaling new products can advise the organization on how to maximize the value of technology investments.

Single issue expert
A best-in-class mind, often dedicated to a single area of expertise, can support your approaches to cyber security, data, analytics, AI, and more.

Technology investor
Someone who knows how to acquire technology can advise on strategic moves to bolster proprietary knowledge.

How to set up a tech advisory board

Establishing a tech advisory board follows other leadership recruitment processes, but requires careful attention. Spending time laying the foundations will ensure you build an effective committee.

Define the purpose and structure

1. Determine strategic imperatives

Determine the strategic roadmap and objectives for your company.

Identify the challenges and opportunities the tech advisory board will address.

Clarify the digital focus areas, such as transformation, artificial intelligence, robotics, tech productization or monetization, cybersecurity, etc.

2. Determine the governance model

Assess the existing governance structure and determine how the tech advisory board will fit in.

Integrate the tech advisory board into the overall governance of the business.

3. Gain leadership buy-in

Gain board and business alignment before forming the tech advisory board to ensure strategic effectiveness.

Assign an ‘anchor chair’ within the board of directors to ensure focus and drive a targeted agenda.

4. Define success for the board

Agree on a clear mission and objectives for the tech advisory board at the outset.

Define the scope of the advisory board’s guidance and decision-making authority.

Establish the cadence and timing of meetings and expected contributions from board members.

Narrow the focus

5. Define the mix of talent on the board

Define the ideal profiles and expertise needed for the board members based on the company's digital strategy.

Consider areas of expertise, such as AI and analytics, data management, cybersecurity, digital, architecture, M&A and investment, and tech strategy.

6. Candidate selection

Conduct a thorough search for candidates with the requisite digital expertise and mindset.

Evaluate candidates based on their proficiency in the required areas, passion for the business, chemistry with existing employees, and ability to engage with the corporate board and executives.

Complete the search

7. Make an offer and begin onboarding

Communicate the roles and expectations to the selected candidates, including their responsibilities and the management structure of the tech advisory board.

Introduce new candidates to key members of the business.

8. Create a collaborative culture

Foster a spirit of openness and collaboration within the tech advisory board.

Ensure buy-in from the executive leadership team regarding the value of the board’s advice.

Maintain regular contact between planned meetings to keep advisors engaged and involved.

Onboard and maintain

9. Review, evaluate, and adapt

Continuously track the efficacy of the tech advisory board to assess its impact.

Reassess the skills matrix and candidate pool to identify any further skills or backgrounds needed.

Avoid common pitfalls, such as under-commitment, straying into execution and strategy, and lack of integration with the rest of the organization.

Organizations embracing tech advisory boards

BP

Context: To continue to transform, change and innovate at pace and scale, bp created an Innovation and Engineering function overseeing digital and technology, engineering, and venturing. bp sought to supplement this by building a digital advisory board to provide guidance on digital opportunities, solutions investment, and platforms.

Composition: The board was comprised of board directors and bp’s executive team, as well as external technology leaders and investment professionals.

Capgemini

Context: Capgemini built an advisory board to source new ideas for development, acquisition targets and deeper understanding of emerging technologies including: data, AI, cyber, blockchain, IoT, 5G, as well as non-tech factors, including investment opportunities, brand, regulatory influences, corporate governance among others.

Composition: The board included both large and small scale technology CEOs, technology officers and innovation leaders, and investment professionals.

Johnson & Johnson

Context: Johnson & Johnson formed an advisory board for Robotics and Digital Solutions, advising on technology and data science to innovate everything from AI-powered disease assessment to robotics-assisted surgery, tackling real-life healthcare obstacles with digital solutions—revolutionizing care for all.

Composition: The board was comprised of R&D and innovation experts, robotics experts, and medical professors.

Innogy

Context: Innogy Innovation Hub created an advisory board to provide strategic advice and guidance to the leadership team and strengthen the Innovation Hub’s market position, seeking leaders with expertise in technology digital leadership.

Composition: The board included investment professionals, computer science professors, and technology and digital leaders.

Common pitfalls to avoid in setting up a tech advisory board

As with structuring any new role or group, there are several pitfalls that can be avoided through careful planning.

Problem with the set up

Lack of clarity: The board is unclear on the objectives, purpose, and engagement expectations, leading to disengagement and wasted time.

Straying into execution: The board oversteps into a managerial role, attempting to direct, execute or manage day-to-day operations, rather than maintaining an advisory position.

Conflict with the board: The board of directors and advisory board disagree. The CEO has not communicated how advice will be balanced and managed.

Feedback mechanism: Regular updates, progress reports, and feedback sessions, and opportunity for transparent communication with the business have not been structured.

Problem with the candidates

Weak chair: The Chair of the Advisory board is not driving engagement between the members or with the business.

Lack of diversity: The board is too homogenous in terms of expertise, experience, functional skillsets, age, gender, or ethnicity.

Under commitment: Time commitments set are either unrealistic, not being adhered to, or the Advisory board may not feel adequately compensated for their time.

Questions to ask yourself when setting up an advisory board

If you are considering creating an advisory board for your organization, it’s important to consider the purpose, and how the board will connect with the business.

Purpose
1. What is the strategic roadmap for your company, and where do digital and technology play the largest role?
2. What are you hoping to achieve with the tech advisory board, and what part will they play in this strategy?

Connectivity with the business
3. Who from the business will have access to the tech advisory board?
4. What will be the board’s mode of engagement with the business? For example, will there be an “anchor chair” within the board of directors?
5. How will the insight and guidance of the tech advisory board be disseminated across the organization?
6. How will conflicts be managed, either within the advisory board, or between the advisory board and the business?

Operations and process
7. For what duration do you envisage the advisory board will be in place?
8. How frequently will the advisory board composition change, and how will you review this?
9. Where and when will the advisory board meet?
10. How will the members be compensated?

Authors

George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers capabilities. He is based in London.
Tuck Rickards leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Technology Industry sector. He is based in San Francisco.
James Roome leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Hub Portfolio. He is based in London.
Nicolas Schwartz leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Business & Professional Services sector. He is based in Paris.

Next Generation Advisory Boards: A Trending Solution for Bridging the Tech Talent Gap

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices