Use The ‘AI Sandwich’ For A Human Approach To New Technology | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Use the ‘AI Sandwich’ for a Human Approach to New Technology

This research is part of the research conducted under AI Leadership: 100% Human pillar of Leadership Labs.

AI can bring quick, unexpected insights to leaders. But without a human approach, your work could end up wholly homogeneous. Here’s how to use the technology to whip up something bold, not bland.

The expectations for what AI tools can achieve on their own are pretty high. So much so, that some people predict it will replace the human hand altogether in plenty of strategic areas.

But, in fact, the opposite is true. If anything, it makes the human touch more important.

Harpreet Khurana, Chief Digital and Data Analytics Officer, explains how to get the best out of new tools using a considerate approach—where the use of AI is sandwiched between human intervention.

The top slice: Human insight

Imagine you are writing an industry insights report: As a starting point, you might want to review research from third-party data sources and combine those with your own proprietary data.

It might be tempting to let the AI drive this part of the analysis. But data provenance and confidence in the quality of external and proprietary data is key. For example, how was the proprietary data collected and compiled—was it through 1:1 conversations or an extrapolation of previous work?

Just as the right raw ingredients impact hugely on the quality of your final dish, your analysis is only as good as the data that feeds it—and you want to be able to trust what you’re serving up.

The filling: AI analysis

Just as you use kitchen tools to more easily chop your vegetables, AI can similarly help add efficiency to your analysis.

As the chef of your industry analysis report, your time might be better spent letting AI ingest your raw input and looking for patterns and connecting the dots.

The AI could take a first pass of all the different cuts of the data, rather than manually teasing them out. Meanwhile, you could be looking at gathering additional perspectives from adjacent industries, or connecting with industry experts.

Even here, it’s important at this stage to add a human checkpoint to avoid becoming over-reliant on what the AI has churned out. This could be a deliberate process to avoid a completely generated output, or the simple act of interrupting what comes out of the algorithm from going directly to clients or colleagues.

In short, necessitate a human touch and sanitize the AI generated analysis.

The bottom slice: Human decision

Now it’s time to plate your dish. You can use AI assistance in adding the final touches, but you do the ultimate taste test alone. You ultimately craft the output, put it into context and ensure that it drives valuable outcomes.

That’s why human judgment becomes even more important when you introduce AI tools. You need to care about the ingredients that go into the meal, even if the middle part of the process is partially done by an algorithm. It’s important to humanize in order to tailor to end user preferences.

The AI might have helped visualize the different lenses and cuts of data, but it’s only you that truly understands the audience who will read the piece and what they’ll get out of it.

That’s why the sandwich is so important. The AI can save you a lot of time, but it can’t interpret nuance. It can churn out readable content in a matter of minutes, but it can’t understand the interplay between customers and companies. It can’t translate and download human dynamics.

AI is currently output oriented, rather than outcome oriented – it might provide you with certain deliverables, but it’s not focused on the long-term goals or strategy of what you’re trying to achieve.

The human touch is therefore still the most important part of your sandwich.

Humanize, don’t homogenize

When we talk about a responsible approach to AI in terms of a sandwich, it’s not simply the process of AI-human-AI, it’s also a sandwich of perspectives.

To get the best out of automation, you also need a cross-section of input. If anything, using a machine to produce content or come up with answers to a critical business problem prompts you to think more about the human element.

Does the output match with your values? Your legal privacy policy? Has it gone through the right set of layers or filters that represents your organization? If it is simply the output of one person’s prompt, it will be fairly limited.

Instead, using AI needs thought and preparation, through the right seasoning of data sources, sanity checks. In essence, it needs human oversight. If you get lazy on this part, everything becomes a sea of sameness.

And if all the sandwiches look the same, who will want to eat at your table?

Author

Harpreet Khurana is Russell Reynolds Associates’ chief digital and data analytics officer. He is based in New York.

Join us as we explore the new frontiers of leadership in an AI-powered world.

FIND OUT MORE

What We Know: The State of Data-Driven Leadership Advisory

Microsoft’s Brad Smith on making the rare leap from GC to President

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices