Unleashing the Power of AI in Supply Chains: Identifying and Developing Leaders for Success | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Unleashing the Power of AI in Supply Chains: Identifying and Developing Leaders for Success

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 1 author

October 30, 2023

6 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Determining who will lead AI transformation is crucial to success. Our research discusses how to identify and develop leaders for a future-ready supply chain.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to fundamentally transform supply chain management, from demand forecasting to inventory management, logistics optimization, and customer engagement.

While some organizations have been making investments for years, others are just starting their AI journey. The introduction of ChatGPT and subsequent surge in interest around large language models (LLMs) and generative AI has thrust this technology conversation into the spotlight.

From a leadership perspective, embracing AI-driven solutions can bring efficiency, agility, and strategic advantage. However, given the technology’s newness and rapid advancement, many leaders are wondering where to begin. To help leaders better understand how AI can transform supply chain management, Russell Reynolds Associates examined the technology, emphasizing the strategic considerations and leadership approaches necessary to harness its full potential.

AI in action: how three companies are leveraging it in supply chain management

According to 2023 Boston Consulting Group research, early adopters are rapidly adopting generative AI throughout the supply chain.1 While AI isn't new to the supply chain management--a 2021 McKinsey study indicated that one-fifth of executives had implemented AI and machine learning for some type of supply chain activity--organizations are moving even faster to embrace generative AI (Figure 1).2

Traditional AI operates based on predetermined rules, similar to following a recipe. Conversely,  generative AI is like a creative assistant that learns from observing, and can generate new ideas independently. Generative AI enables users to quickly generate new content based on a variety of inputs. Inputs and outputs to these models can include text, images, sounds, animation, 3D models, or other types of data.

Figure 1: Supply chain adoption of AI

20%

McKinsey survey in 2021 indicated that 20% of executives had implemented AI and machine learning for some type of supply-chain-planning activity.

49%

Ivalua survey of 850 procurement leaders across Europe and North America in July 2023 showed a 49% adoption rate for generative AI in the procurement / supply chain function.

Digitization is vital for organizations wishing to become supply chain leaders. These companies must invest to scale that effort, enabling agile decision-making and adaptability through tools like AI and machine learning (ML).3 Below, we explore how impactful organizations like Walmart, Sanofi and Schneider Electric are benefiting from AI:

Walmart has transformed its AI-driven supply chain efforts from predicting in-store sales demand to forecasting consumer demand based on what customers actually want to buy. This shift has been enabled by analyzing data across various channels, including Google searches and TikTok social feeds. In June 2022, Walmart announced that it was planning to open four next-generation fulfillment centers that use robotics and ML to speed up fulfillment over the next three years. Additionally, Walmart will bring Symbotic’s next-generation robotics and AI technology to all 42 regional distribution centers by 2030.4 Finally, according to CEO Doug McMillon, the organization is developing its own generative AI models to make its supply chain more efficient and better connect with customers.5

According to Brendan O'Callaghan, Executive Vice President of Manufacturing and Supply at Sanofi, manufacturing and supply operations are drawing on advances in AI to produce medicines and vaccines faster, smarter, and more sustainably. With AI & ML capabilities, Sanofi has managed to reduce closure time by 60%, lowering cycle times and advancing productivity while strengthening quality and supply reliability.6

Schneider Electric began its “AI at Scale” initiative in 2021, appointing its first Chief AI Officer. They have implemented a global “hub and spoke” AI operating model, where each business function (spoke) has an AI product owner and change agent who works with the tech competency center (hub) to discover new use cases for AI. One of the supply chain use cases leverages AI to balance inventory based on projected demand. The insights from those projections resulted in about $15 million in savings.7

Leadership considerations when embedding AI into supply chain management

Integrating AI into supply chain management presents both opportunities and complex challenges for leaders. To successfully harness the power of AI in optimizing supply chain operations, leaders must consider a range of strategic, organizational, regulatory, and ethical factors. Here's an exploration of some of the leadership considerations involved when it comes to leadership, culture, organizational structure, and risk management:

1. Strategic alignment

This is crucial for the successful adoption of AI in supply chain management. When implementing AI technologies, organizations need to ensure that their AI initiatives are closely aligned with their broader business strategy. By doing this, they can maximize AI’s benefits and achieve their desired outcomes more effectively. AI has great value creation potential:

A 2023 McKinsey survey found that 33% of respondents in supply chain management witnessed cost reductions as a result of adopting AI, while 56% reported an increase in revenue.8

In a recent Gantner survey, 61% of respondents considered supply chain technologies, such as AI, a source of competitive advantage.9

2. Change management and cultural shifts

According to a Ivalua survey of 850 procurement leaders in July 2023, 35% of respondents are concerned that their role will be replaced by generative AI.10

AI might supply a new framework, but human judgment, creativity, and strategic thinking are still necessary to lead and develop effectively. Leaders should aim to meet their people with passion, authenticity, rigor, and humility. That’s something they’ll never get from a bot.

Leaders should communicate the benefits of AI, foster a learning mindset, and lead by example. Additionally, predictions on AI’s potential impact on workforce size in supply chain management (Figure 2) may reinforce resistance to change. When addressing these concerns, leaders must communicate transparently, educate employees on the tool’s additive benefits, and address employee concerns in an open and supportive environment.

Figure 2: Effect of generative AI adoption on number of employees by function over the next 3 years

% of respondents

Source: McKinsey, The state of AI in 2023: Generative AI’s breakout year, August 1, 2023. N = 1,684. Data collected between April 11-21, 2023. | Note: McKinsey Global Survey to 1,684 participants at all levels of the organization. Respondents were asked about only the business functions in which they said their organizations have adopted AI.

3. Continuous learning and adaptation

AI technologies evolve rapidly, so leaders need to stay updated on AI trends, encourage innovation, and embrace agility.

The new nature of competition is really not about technology; AI technology moves too fast for that. It’s about the value you deliver to customers. And whatever value you deliver, it can be augmented through partnerships.”

- Philippe Rambach, Chief AI Officer at Schneider Electric11

4. Cross-functional collaboration and organizational structure decisions

Effective AI implementation requires collaboration across different departments. This effectiveness is highly influenced by the organization’s structure.

While dedicated R&D teams will continue to create new products, every function within the company can have its own R&D capability, leveraging AI tools to improve their respective workflows and processes. The best structures will facilitate collaboration between business and technology, breaking down organizational silos.

5. AI governance and data privacy

The success of AI-driven supply chain initiatives heavily relies on accurate and high-quality data. Leaders should establish data governance policies, ensure data security, and address ethical concerns alongside existing and emerging regulations.

Government regulations, such as the EU AI Act, will increasingly impact the deployment of AI, extending beyond ethical considerations.12

Embracing the AI revolution: Identifying and developing leaders for a future-ready supply chain

Supply chains have become a strategic priority for many organizations, shifting them from out of sight to front and center on C-suite and, increasingly, board agendas. With organizations racing to capture AI’s value, the significance of supply chains as a strategic issue at the board level is likely to be amplified.

To gain an AI advantage, organizations need to embed it throughout their supply chains. While companies will continue to have dedicated central teams, embedding data science teams within functional departments—such as supply chain—promise more success by connecting analytics projects closely with specific needs, providing dedicated resources, and focusing expertise.13 These efforts and teams require supply chain leaders with technology acumen who are forward thinking and create a culture of continuous innovation. The best ones understand that technology is an enterprise-wide responsibility, and know how to harness technology for strategic advantage.

At Russell Reynolds, our teams of industry experts and industrial organizational psychologists help find and develop those leaders. We assess candidates across three horizons, evaluating their experience, skills, competencies, and versatility. The goal is to identify individuals who have the capabilities needed to address both current and future technology change needs (Figure 3).

Figure 3: RRA process for finding tech-first leaders

Determining who will lead AI transformation is crucial to success. External advisors can offer valuable perspectives when it comes to finding and developing those individuals.

Authors

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Dallas.
Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in the Americas. He is based in Toronto.
Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.
Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.
Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.

Footnotes

1. Boston Consulting Group. July 10, 2023. Building the Supply Chain of the Future. https://www.bcg.com/en-ca/publications/2023/building-the-supply-chain-of-the-future

2. Marilú Destino, Julian Fischer, Daniel Müllerklein, & Vera Trautwein. February 9, 2022. To improve your supply chain, modernize your supply-chain IT. McKinsey. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/operations/our-insights/to-improve-your-supply-chain-modernize-your-supply-chain-it

3. Boston Consulting Group. July 10, 2023. Building the Supply Chain of the Future. https://www.bcg.com/en-ca/publications/2023/building-the-supply-chain-of-the-future

4. Sharon Goldman. June 9, 2022. AI is embedded everywhere at Walmart. VentureBeat. https://venturebeat.com/ai/ai-is-embedded-everywhere-at-walmart/

5. Timothy Inklebarger. August 17, 2023. Walmart CEO 'excited about what’s possible' with AI. Winsight.
https://www.winsightgrocerybusiness.com/technology/walmart-ceo-excited-about-whats-possible-ai

6. Brendan O'Callaghan. June 18, 2023. AI Goes Industrial. https://www.sanofi.com/en/magazine/our-science/ai-goes-industrial

7. Lisa Lee. March 28, 2023. This Company Saved Millions with AI – Here’s How. Salesforce.
https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-at-scale/

8. McKinsey. August 1, 2023. The state of AI in 2023: Generative AI’s breakout year. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/our-insights/the-state-of-ai-in-2023-generative-ais-breakout-year

9. Sarah Hippold. April 20, 2022. Emerging and maturing supply chain technology is a major source of competitive advantage. Gartner. https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/gartner-predicts-the-future-of-supply-chain-technology

10. Neil Perry. August 25, 2023. Ivalua survey: Gen AI adoption gathers pace in procurement. Procurement Magazine. https://procurementmag.com/articles/ivalua-survey-gen-ai-adoption-gathers-pace-in-procurement

11. Randy Bean &  Allison Sagraves. June 20, 2023. Why Chief Data and AI Officers Are Set Up to Fail. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2023/06/why-chief-data-and-ai-officers-are-set-up-to-fail

12. Saurine Doshi, Aman Sethi, Jay Motani, & Eric Rivera. August 23, 2023. What are the opportunities, realities, and obstacles for generative AI in supply chains? Kearney. https://www.kearney.com/service/analytics/article/what-are-the-opportunities-realities-and-obstacles-for-generative-ai-in-supply-chains

13. Marta Stelmaszak & Kelsey Kline. April 27, 2023. Managing Embedded Data Science Teams for Success: How Managers Can Navigate the Advantages and Challenges of Distributed Data Science. Harvard Data Science Review, 5(2). https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.1f068331

Unleashing the Power of AI in Supply Chains: Identifying and Developing Leaders for Success

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices