Chapter 1: Underestimating strategic alignment efforts when defining success factors | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Chapter 1: Underestimating strategic alignment efforts when defining success factors

Boards often underestimate the effort, costs, and risks that accompany successful strategic alignment on succession plans, often starting the process too late, failing to articulate a forward-looking CEO mandate, and conflating stakeholder agreement with stakeholder alignment.

Trap 1: Procrastinating

49% of board directors and CHROs admitted that the CEO succession process began less than one year before the CEO change.

Boards tend to procrastinate when it comes to making important CEO succession decisions. Via the Global Leadership Monitor, we asked board directors and CHROs who were involved in a CEO transition in the last three years to indicate when the CEO succession process started. In reflecting on their most recent CEO change, 42% said that their CEO succession process began one to two years prior to the actual CEO change, and 49% admitted that the process began less than one year before. This is an issue. Our experts recommend that, for the best results, succession discussion should begin at least four years before a CEO change is likely to happen.

When an organization is performing well, boards may hesitate to broach CEO succession, instead allowing the incumbent CEO to dictate when the process begins, or wait until the last minute to take action. This tendency to procrastinate, or cave into the importance-immediacy paradox (tabling long-term strategic discussions to attend to urgent short-term issues), is natural in environments with a steady state of distraction, complexity, and uncertainty.

With macro forces causing volatility and uncertainty, many boards are grappling with strained attention and problem-solving capacity, either turning to other issues or allowing themselves buffer time before addressing the CEO office. To prepare for these unpredictable market forces and bolster leadership health, boards cannot afford to mistime appointing the next CEO. They must consider how to proactively, intentionally, and continuously bring up the topic of CEO succession for discussion.

Trap 2: Anchoring

Boards tend to begin defining successful attributes by debating the current CEO’s strengths and weaknesses, instead of understanding market and leadership trends. This premature conversation causes boards to unwittingly yield to anchoring bias, becoming overly focused on identifying individuals who either mirror the current CEO or sharply contrast them. This anchoring effect can be especially pronounced in a couple of scenarios—when a successful CEO retires, boards tend to want an identical replacement; when a CEO has been asked to step down, boards gravitate toward leaders with polar opposite profiles.

Trap 3: Conflating stakeholder agreement with alignment

Boards and nominating committees will often reach an agreement on the key forces that are most affecting the organization, identifying a ‘wish list’ of ideal capabilities and experiences that the next CEO needs to succeed. However, rarely will one candidate meet every single criterion on this list. How boards prioritize across that wish list is critical—and is often not given sufficient attention.

As the process continues and the board shifts from engaging with concepts to engaging with candidates (each with their strengths and weaknesses), that initial agreement can quickly unravel. Divergent views on priorities make it clear that boards lack true alignment. An early conflation of agreement and alignment can have cascading consequences across the succession process, manifesting in ineffective candidate evaluations (because the decision-makers are not using the same language or parameters for measuring candidates) and poor candidate experiences (because the interviewers do not present a cohesive role articulation).

How can boards overcome these CEO succession decision-making complexities?

Integrate evergreen succession into discussions.
When CEO succession is a consistent boardroom topic, boards don’t have to worry about offending the incumbent CEO or feeling beholden to external circumstances. Independent board leaders (chairs or lead independent directors) who involve the CEO in these discussions from the get-go help enforce the idea that succession is a transparent, disclosable, and iterative process. This enables the organization to develop an iterative ‘CEO succession mindset’.

Leverage a macro-level framework to build a dynamic success profile.
Use a straightforward model that allows stakeholders to identify future leadership needs, current leadership capabilities, and close any gaps. This will help stakeholders define what the next CEO needs to accomplish, while also enabling stakeholders to evolve the success profile as markets fluctuate and organizational context changes.

Invest in and continually test alignment.
Force ranking success profile attributes allows the board and incumbent CEO to further build out a dynamic success profile, enabling the board to surface assumptions and address inconsistencies within the group. This process will help the independent board leader to monitor alignment, evolve the succession strategy, and guide the board on how to respond to new leadership needs as events unfold and hold unified expectations as to how the succession strategy needs to pivot.

« Foreword

Next Chapter »

Explore more chapters

Chapter 2: Forgetting to create sufficient optionality when determining the talent universe

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting optionality and how to overcome them

Chapter 3: Distorting the leadership evaluation when assessing candidates

Learn more about the psychological traps impacting leadership evaluation and how to overcome them

Chapter 4: Failing to consider the ripple effects of the CEO selection decision

Learn more about the psychological traps when boards fail to appreciate CEO succession consequences and how to overcome them

Methodology

Data sourced from Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2023 Global Leadership Monitor, which surveyed 500 CEOs, board directors, and CHROs on the state of CEO succession and stakeholder perspectives, and interviews with 14 of our Board and CEO Advisory Partners consultants.

Authors

Joy Tan and Tom Handcock of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

Learn more about the authors and The Center for Leadership Insight

Justus O’Brien is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in New York.
Dean Stamoulis is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in Atlanta.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank contributors from Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners who participated for their time and their valuable perspective:

Gretchen Anderson

Sarah Eames

Dee Fitzgerald

David Lange

Stephen Langton

Margot McShane

Luke Meynell

Rusty O’Kelley

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Jennifer Rockwood

Charles Tribbett III

Ty Wiggins

Anita Wingrove

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Start your CEO Succession story

Speak to a Consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices