Start CEO succession early and seize these five opportunities | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Start CEO Succession Early and Seize These Five Opportunities

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsSuccessionLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Article

Dr. Rebecca Slan Jerusalim

September 20, 2024

8 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsSuccessionLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Executive Summary

Boards must proactively manage CEO succession to ensure long-term survival, align on leadership needs, groom candidates, and retain top talent.

Close

Dr. Rebecca Slan Jerusalim

Toronto

The long-term survival of an organization is a responsibility that falls on the shoulders of the board, and there is no greater stress test of that duty than during a changing of the guard.

With CEO tenures getting shorter, there has been an increasing number of succession events. Yet many boards are not prepared for when CEO tenures come to an end—more than half of boards do not have emergency or long-term succession plans in place.

This oversight is not due to directors’ lack of awareness. While boards understand the importance of CEO succession, the reality is that more pressing issues (such as economic volatility, geopolitical flareups, and yes, a global pandemic) always take precedence—a psychological pitfall known as the importance-immediacy paradox.

Another complicating factor is that instigating a conversation with an incumbent CEO about succession can feel untimely and awkward. CEOs may be uncomfortable talking about their longevity and tenure. This insecurity can create a divide between well-intentioned boards trying to plan for the future and CEOs who are not yet ready to discuss succession.

Consider the events that took place at an international transportation company, which illustrates the perils of an unprepared board. When the CEO made the decision to hang up their hat, the board’s reaction was one of uncertainty, and a number of questions began bubbling to the surface: How will the markets react to the announcement? How will our recent successes be impacted? Do we have candidates ready to take over? The answer to that last question was ‘no.’

When the reality of the succession event finally hit, it became clear to the board that it would take several years to develop a strong slate of CEO candidates, a timeline that they did not have. The board ultimately had to select an unprepared successor, who faced criticism for his lack of readiness to take over. The alternative would have been to select an outside successor—but there are consequences in doing so too.

The antidote to such perils is to proactively manage CEO succession the moment a new successor takes over. Successions are complex on the best of days, and they are particularly traumatic when the transition occurs over a short stretch of time—imagine running a distance of a marathon at the pace of a 100-meter dash.

Treating succession as an ongoing and future-focused process creates five opportunities for boards and CEO candidates, ultimately facilitating organizational and incumbent success.

Opportunity #1: Facilitate board alignment

Many board members want to provide input on who the next successor should be but have limited time to focus their attention on a robust succession strategy. This is a breeding ground for tension, bad decisions, and frustration within the board, especially when directors have different ideas about what good leadership looks like and the longer-term strategic leadership needs of the business.

Starting CEO succession early not only ensures that everyone has a voice, but most importantly, that the board is aligned on the type of person and background required for the next CEO—a leadership blueprint. This north star establishes the objective and context-dependent criteria against which CEO candidates are evaluated and is arguably the single most important element of a robust CEO succession program.

The process of constructing and debating these crucial criteria enables the board to think about key requirements for the organization’s future objectively and critically, without being swayed by the current CEO’s profile or potential successors’ attributes. It also allows the board to meaningfully debate the future of the organization and the leadership required to get there.

Opportunity #2: Increase board visibility to successors

Investing time in CEO succession also adds value by increasing board members’ awareness of CEO candidates. A survey of directors led by Stanford University revealed that almost half of respondents did not understand the strengths and weaknesses of senior executives. Without true insight into potential CEO candidates, boards draw on their implicit knowledge, frames of reference, and, sometimes, subconscious biases.

In such instances, it is natural for directors to anchor confidently on familiar CEO archetypes, such as charismatic leaders. But while these individuals leave a memorable imprint, they might not always have the goods to be an effective CEO. Critically, these biases hurt underrepresented leaders such as women and visible minorities because they are not always psychologically associated with positions of leadership.

One way to counteract such biases is to ensure that potential CEO successors have greater exposure to the board by way of regular presentations that are created for directors to see the candidates in action. In doing so, boards ultimately make more informed choices and decisions when selecting the next CEO.

Opportunity #3: Enhance candidate grooming

A major contributing factor to CEO failure is improper grooming, a process that cannot be rushed. The prevailing wisdom is that, before becoming a CEO, candidates should hold at least two major enterprise positions, for a minimum of three years each, to ensure adequate learning and testing of their skillsets. With recent average CEO tenures ranging anywhere from five to seven years, candidate grooming needs to begin soon after a new CEO is chosen.

Staying close to your potential CEO successors not only ensures that you have an initial assessment of their suitability for the top job, but it also allows you to revise their fit over time. Armed with insight into their skills and capabilities, and importantly, who they are and how they are wired, you can create and/or maneuver candidates into the critical development opportunities necessary to increase their readiness to become CEO.

Ultimately, organizations are better positioned for successful CEO transitions if they have tested their top talent and developed a strong bench of multiple individuals who are ready to take over. When boards are thoughtful and focused on grooming long-term talent, they maximize the optionality of internal CEO candidates before an actual decision is required.

Opportunity #4: Ensure a sense of fairness and reflection

While the reality is that most candidates will not be the next CEO, it is still disappointing for those who have been considered for the position. Being vetted for the top job is a stressful and arduous process, and if done in a short amount of time, can make unsuccessful candidates feel like what was rightfully their job was stolen from them. However, a rigorous succession process that unfolds gradually mitigates such perceptions in two ways.

First, evaluating all candidates against the leadership blueprint highlights important gaps between the unsuccessful candidates’ profiles and those of the organization’s ideal CEO. Utilizing such objective criteria demonstrates to unsuccessful candidates that the CEO role was not theirs to lose and ensures that all candidates have a fair and equal shot.

Second, unsuccessful candidates also require time to process all that has passed and forecast what is to come. A rigorous succession plan allows for boards to help unsuccessful candidates with this cognitive work, allowing the directors to demonstrate their commitment to them, even though they were not chosen as the next CEO.

Opportunity #5: Strengthen candidate retention

When CEO successions are initiated and completed abruptly, unsuccessful internal candidates can feel sidelined and that their momentary involvement in the selection process was hastily evaluated. More often than not, candidates with such opinions eventually resign with the expectation to find better opportunities elsewhere. If exits materialize, this top talent will leave with some critical components that threaten a smooth transition—their expertise, institutional knowledge, clients, and possibly their direct reports.

A succession process that adopts a long-term focus provides opportunities for organizations to offer developmental insight and coaching to unsuccessful candidates. This emphasis on development ensures that internal candidates feel valued during the succession process and demonstrates the organization’s commitment to both these individuals’ growth and to retain them.

Beyond minimizing negative attrition, this strategy also supports positive change and momentum for the incoming CEO. Ingrained top team dynamics can be an obstacle and will inevitably have to shift with the presence of the new boss. For the new CEO, insight into the strengths and developmental gaps of the top team can better facilitate team effectiveness post-transition.

The bottom line

Starting the succession process early confers benefits that extend beyond a key-person risk management exercise when the CEO decides to hand over the keys. Consider CEO succession as an investment that builds equity over time by:

Facilitating board alignment, which gives all board members a voice, and encourages diversity of thought and debate about the future needs of the organization and the leadership required to get there.

Increasing board visibility to successors, which gives directors greater awareness of the strengths and weaknesses of candidates and counteracts implicit biases in the absence of true insight.

Enhancing candidate grooming by continually assessing their suitability for the top job, providing development opportunities necessary to increase their readiness, and ensuring multiple individuals are ready to take over.

Ensuring a sense of fairness by establishing and assessing candidates against objective criteria and providing adequate time for unsuccessful candidates to reflect on the process and outcomes of succession.

Strengthening candidate retention by adopting a long-term, developmental focus which helps internal candidates feel valued during the succession process and facilitates productive top-team dynamics with the new CEO at the helm.

Authors

Rebecca Slan Jerusalim is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. She is based in Toronto.
Navio Kwok is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in Toronto.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices