Innovating Through AI For More Equitable Talent Outcomes | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Innovating Through AI For More Equitable Talent Outcomes

Transformation and InnovationTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersInclusion and Culture

Article

April 12, 2024

3 min

Transformation and InnovationTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

AI’s proliferation has raised important questions about its impacts—both positive and negative—on equitable talent processes.

Close

With the game changing technological innovation of generative artificial Intelligence (GenAI), companies will require more than incremental innovations—many business models will be entirely transformed.

The accelerated adoption of generative AI tools like ChatGPT has brought new focus to AI’s potential in talent processes. However, there are differing opinions regarding AI’s long term impacts on diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI). While some leaders are concerned that AI has a propensity to perpetuate bias at scale, others believe AI can effectively accelerate de-biasing efforts.  At a time when DEI-specific recruiting and development programs are being challenged in the US courts, leaders can leverage AI to accelerate equitable talent outcomes.

The upside of AI on talent processes

Although executive recruiting is very high touch and somewhat immune, workforce talent processes can be transformed through AI.  For example, in talent acquisition, applications of AI include automated sourcing of online profiles and cataloging of skills and experiences; automated resume screening to identify profiles that best fit the criteria in job specifications; and candidate assessment via AI-supported analysis of interview transcripts and sentiments. In talent development, AI can be used to analyze workforce performance data and generate predictive success profiles. These applications can result in both increased efficiency and effectiveness in talent processes.

The risk of bias perpetuation

That said, the potential for bias to creep into both data sets and decision-making algorithms is a major risk when using AI in talent systems. For example, some tools utilize HRIS (human resources information systems) company level data to identify who has been successful in jobs based on performance data analysis and individual profile data, found on sites like LinkedIn.  If the HRIS workforce performance data includes a gap in promotion rates between certain demographic groups (e.g., men vs. women), the existing bias represented in the company data may be perpetuated when using analytics to predict successful profiles.

Disrupting talent bias

However, bias can also be disrupted. These mechanisms can be built into data sets, as well as the algorithms analyzing them.  In the example of combining external profile data with company performance data to generate predictive success profiles, organizations can preemptively correct the promotion differentials that may exist between demographic groups within the algorithm. When applying AI to screen resumes against job specifications, bias disruption techniques might include scoping the job description to include only “must have” vs. “nice to have” job requirements, which opens the aperture and optimizes potential applicant diversity.

The diversity, equity, and inclusion silo

Traditionally, DEI programs have been designed for under-represented demographic groups to increase their representation at every organizational level. But in the aftermath of the US Supreme Court decision on race conscious admissions, DEI programs like these are being challenged.  Additionally, many organizations are finding that siloed DEI departments can only have limited impact.

Leveraging AI accelerate equitable outcomes

Modern approaches embed equity practices into the full talent management life cycle. For example, in talent development, a desired outcome could be to ensure that all demographic groups are adequately represented in overall leadership development programs. Organizational leaders can embed equity steps into the sourcing process by leveraging AI to: identify a wide range of participants, efficiently scan the relevant employee population, systematically assess applicants by matching assessment data with future potential roles, and tabulate individual calibrations to provide a selection recommendation that is not influenced by group think.  As leaders seek more equitable talent outcomes, AI is a powerful tool for human capital innovation.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices