Inclusive Leadership: The Key to Fostering Belonging & Innovation | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Inclusive Leadership: The Key to Fostering Belonging & Innovation

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionTransformation and InnovationInclusion and Culture

Article

July 01, 2024

4 min

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionTransformation and InnovationInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

Leaders with inclusive leadership, in four domains according to our model, can bolster organization’s capacity for innovation.

Close

In the ever-evolving landscape of corporate responsibility, Inclusion and Culture continue to shape the future of work. Recently, the inclusion narrative has broadened focus from representation to nurturing belonging in the workplace. One key element in forming a sense of belonging is the creation of an inclusive culture, which can only be achieved via inclusive leadership.

To help leaders unlock the benefits of inclusive leadership, this article seeks to define inclusive leadership, shedding light on how leaders can harness inclusion principles in a practical way to bolster an organization’s capacity for innovation.

Fostering employee belonging: RRA’s Inclusive Leadership Model

When employees feel they can be their authentic selves at work, they experience a greater sense of belonging and, by extension, are better able to channel their energy  towards their work responsibilities.

To help leaders create a sense of belonging in their organizations, we developed RRA’s Inclusive Leadership Model. This model comprises four key competencies, beginning with a foundation of Awareness & Clarity, upon which are built more advance competencies such as Courageous Accountability, Empowering Others, and finally, Innovative Collaboration.

Figure 1: RRA’s Inclusive Leadership Model

Each of these competencies operates along two dimensions—intrapersonal and interpersonal.

Intrapersonal

Pertains to personal self-regulation, in which leaders reflect on and manage their own beliefs, biases, and behaviors that enables them to be authentic role models of inclusion.

Interpersonal

Involves the leader's interaction with others, in which they engage with team members that develops a wider team culture that respects and appreciates diversity.

This multi-level, inside/out approach to inclusivity helps ensure that leaders are integrating inclusion concepts into their work at every level of the organization.

Recently, RRA collaborated with Siemens China to study the implementation of inclusive leadership. Read on to learn more about each of these competencies, as well as how they’re being deployed within a leading organization to develop a more inclusive culture and amplify innovation.

Awareness & Clarity

An effective inclusion and culture strategy requires a deep-rooted foundation of awareness and clarity around equity principles across all organizational levels. This goes beyond the superficial acknowledgement of inclusion as a concept, and instead encompasses a clear and specific  understanding of the organization’s inclusion priorities, what needs to be true to achieve those goals, and how those goals will shift as the organization evolves.

Leaders developing a sense of awareness and clarity should actively encourage open dialogues to enhance everyone’s understanding of inclusion, making it a collective responsibility and an ongoing conversation, rather than a static mandate.

“We need to continuously talk about inclusion and culture, giving everyone time to develop a gradual awareness. It is a process of constant effort; only through perseverance can a real impact be made.”

– Helen Wang
People & Organization Lead Business Partner, Digital Industries, Siemens China

Intrapersonal: Identify one’s own motivations, privileges, and inclusion acumen.

Siemens China focuses on cultivating a “growth mindset”, which involves creating adaptable strategies, rather than “sticking to the old ways no matter what”, in its leaders. This mindset allows leaders to mitigate prejudices to make the hiring and promotion of female employees more equitable across various lines of the company.

Interpersonal: Foster an atmosphere of open dialogue and promote discussions on inclusion issues.

Every March, Siemens China hosts a inclusion and culture month, launching a variety of inclusion and culture-themed topics and activities to foster open dialogue between leaders at every level.

Courageous Accountability

Leaders practicing courageous accountability make their commitment to inclusion principles publicly known, refusing to shy away from difficult conversations that confront biases and advocate for change at the individual and organizational level.

These leaders also champion personal autonomy, embracing and celebrating diverse perspectives across age groups, backgrounds, and disciplines. This includes allowing people to construct a work/life balance that works for them. This respect for individuality not only allows everyone to realize their full potential, but also maximizes the collective strength of the team.

“Flexible working increases employees’ sense of belonging. As long as the tasks are completed within the given time, it stimulates self-motivation and the desire to complete work efficiently.”

– Lv Shumin
General Manager of Jiangxi Territory, Digital Industries, Siemens China

Intrapersonal: Hold yourself accountable to challenging prejudices, embracing change and trust people to get work done in the way that’s most efficient for them.

Siemens China had implemented a flexible-work system even before the COVID-19 pandemic. Employees can arrange their work according to their specific needs and priorities. This has resulted in employees taking personal ownership of their work more seriously, thereby improving efficiency.

Interpersonal: Hold others accountable by addressing situations in which people may be excluded or underrepresented.

At Siemens Research Institute, leaders make an effort to recognize ideas from young, new employees, thereby dismantling age stereotypes and allowing fresh perspectives ideas. The company culture focuses on amplifying individual strengths (versus compensating for weaknesses.)

Empowering Others

The next tier of inclusive leadership competencies involves expanding equitable opportunities for others. Leaders should help team members recognize their strengths and identify development goals, while fostering broader organizational connections. For team members, this approach doesn’t imply waiting passively for empowerment. Instead, it encourages individuals to proactively pursue their own development path, break through internal barriers, step outside their comfort zone, and embrace new challenges and responsibilities.

“I talked a lot with my mentor about corporate digital strategies, team management, how technical and business departments can cooperate, and how to face customers, among other issues. He gave me a lot of advice, which greatly increased my confidence.”

– Zhang Yingli
Director of R&D, Siemens Research Institute

Intrapersonal: Actively reflect on and identify development opportunities that suit your personal growth and motivations, not waiting for others to initiate the opportunities for you.

Siemens China established a Women in Tech community to provide a space for women to support each other, share their stories, and encourage each other to step out of comfort zone to try new responsibilities.

Interpersonal: Expand growth and development opportunities for all team members, based on their attributes and skills.

Siemens China established a mentorship program aimed at matching leaders with experienced mentors. These mentors are usually senior leaders within the company who can share their experiences and provide guidance on career paths.

Innovative Collaboration

When a team fully embraces the diverse backgrounds of its members and actively encourages a range of development trajectories, it cultivates a wealth of perspectives and creative insights. This enriches the organization’s decision-making process and drives continuous innovation.

Leaders who embrace innovative collaboration constantly seek new insights and challenge both their own and others’ conventional thinking patterns. They foster constructive debates within the team, ensuring these discussions focus on the merits of the ideas rather than personal differences. Through persistent evaluation of a technology's commercial potential and customer value, team members demonstrate their commitment to the organization and their peers.

“Brainstorming together means there should be a storm; without it, how can it be called brainstorming? A storm should be the norm when discussing new ideas, otherwise, it just becomes a regular meeting.”

– Fu Ling
Chief Research Scientist, Siemens China

Intrapersonal: Recognize that each situation may require different skillsets or perspectives beyond one's own.

At the Siemens Research Institute, a new team was formed by merging two groups with consulting and technical backgrounds. During the integration process, colleagues kept an open mind, listened to others’ views and ideas without prejudice, and ultimately achieved a full team integration.

Interpersonal: Leverage differences to win, creating space for a range of perspectives.

When colleagues with consulting backgrounds proposed innovative ideas that seem far-fetched at first, their technology colleagues didn’t dismiss them. Instead, through ongoing dialogue, they sifted through feasible ideas, merging customer-oriented perspectives with technical research to create unique product strategies.

“Some of our colleagues are very creative, but need guidance on how to make low-cost trials and errors. What exactly is the mistake? What needs to be validated? Which should be validated first? And when should one decide to give up an idea? We should foster creativity in people, while also providing support in these growth areas.”

– Fu Ling
Chief Research Scientist, Siemens China

Why inclusive cultures lead to better innovation

Inclusion and culture is a long-term journey, and most organizations take over a decade to fully develop these programs. Developing inclusive leadership equips organizations with the “software” necessary to drive innovation. Concurrently, companies can strengthen the “hardware” mechanisms that foster innovation, such as processes and policies.

Innovation is delicate, especially in its nascent stages. To allow it to flourish, it’s essential to create an environment where new ideas are nurtured, rather than overshadowed by day-to-day business operations. Organizations need to consider how to handle resource allocation for innovation, balance daily operations, ensure that innovative employees are encouraged, and support the growth of new ideas.

RRA Authors

Shoon Lim leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Inclusion and Culture practice globally. She is based in Singapore.
Laura Syn leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Asia-Pacific Knowledge team. She is based in Hong Kong.
Chensong Li is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Asia-Pacific Knowledge team. He is based in Shanghai.

Contributing Authors

Lucy Lei is former Russell Reynolds Associates Board & CEO advisor, now managing director & founder of Genesis Pacific Advisory. She is based in Shanghai.

Siemens China Authors

Dr. Wu Jiunyan is Siemens’ Head of Talent & Leadership, Asia & Australia. He is based in Beijing.
Chen Wei is a Talent & Leadership Senior Strategic Consultant at Siemens. She is based in Shanghai.

Methodology

We interviewed 10 leaders from various Siemens business units based in China to learn their thoughts and activities involved with inclusion and culture practices.

References

The New Wellness at Work: Improving Culture via Employee Well-being | Russell Reynolds Associates

Walk the Talk: Inclusive Leadership Development Moves the Needle On inclusion and culture | Russell Reynolds Associates

Inclusive Leadership: Unlocking the Value of Diversity and Inclusion | Russell Reynolds Associates

Siemens China People inclusion and culture Narrative

Inclusive Leadership: The Key to Fostering Belonging & Innovation

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices