How Going Private Changes Exec Talent Essentials | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Going Private Changes Exec Talent Essentials

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

December 15, 2023

3 min

Technology and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

Executives need a value-creation mindset, long-term vision, flexibility, innovation, and expertise in private equity dynamics. Transition requires strong leadership.

Close

A wave of take-private transactions are revolutionizing business operations, reshaping strategies, and significantly impacting executive talent requirements, bringing a storm of fast moving leadership opportunities to the market.

The transition from public to private fundamentally alters the playing field, presenting a fresh array of challenges and opportunities for C-suite and board executives. But, how does going private influence executive talent requirements? And what are the essential skill sets needed to standout in this transformative environment? Our advisors lay it out.

1. Value-Creation Mindset

Private ownership emphasizes the importance of value creation over short-term financial metrics. Executives must have a value-oriented mindset and a strong grasp of how to create sustainable growth and resilience, even if this requires what may appear as short-term "value-destructive" ch strategies. They need to focus on long-term value drivers, like market share expansion, operational efficiencies, and strategic partnerships. Additionally, the transition to private ownership often brings changes in governance structure, including the composition of the board. Executives may need to drive change at a faster pace and work closely with the board to align strategic objectives and implement necessary transformations.

2. Long-Term Vision and Strategic Acumen

Going private allows companies to take a longer-term view of their strategies and operations. Unlike their publicly traded counterparts, private companies are not beholden to quarterly earnings reports or the constant pressure to meet short-term financial expectations. This shift requires executives to possess a deeper understanding of long-term planning, strategic thinking, and the ability to execute transformative changes. They also need the vision to set a clear direction for the company's future and the strategic acumen to navigate complex market dynamics.

3. Flexibility and Innovation

Private ownership provides an environment that fosters innovation and agility. Executives must be ready to navigate more radical operational reorganizations and strategic pivots. These changes may not always align with traditional business models, and thus, executives need the agility to adapt, take risks, and drive innovation, while also driving a culture that embraces change to stay ahead of the competition.

4. Expertise in Private Equity Dynamics

Executives navigating the private realm must understand the nuances of private equity, including how to work effectively with sponsors and investors. This expertise and ability to span both public and private environments are increasingly valuable to building a long-term career and board-ready portfolio. Executives need to understand the expectations of private equity owners, the financial and operational levers that drive value creation, and the importance of timely and transparent communication with stakeholders.

The transition from public to private ownership is not just a financial maneuver; it's a transformative journey that reshapes the talent requirements for executives at the highest levels – and it often means that companies need to take stock in the leadership they have and benchmark it against the leadership they need. As companies take this step, they require leaders who have a value-creation mindset, can envision long-term success, drive innovation, and understand private equity dynamics. If this sounds like the right opportunity for you, set up a conversation with our advisors.

Until next month, enjoy the insights below.

Why public tech CEOs are turning over, fast—and how companies should plan for succession

This year is yielding an unprecedented level of turnover among CEOs within the tech industry. Companies must plan for this eventuality.

Find out more

What We’re Reading at RRA:

The Rise of AI: Implications for Leadership

Wired covers how developers at smaller companies have been adding new ways to experience the internet with AI assistance. Their visions for the future radically differ.

Mozilla Adds New Board Members, Prioritizing Diverse Tech Expertise

Tech company Mozilla has added four members from diverse backgrounds to the board of its parent organization, the Mozilla Foundation.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices