How Investing in Employee Wellbeing Can Radically Improve Organizational Culture | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Investing in Employee Wellbeing Can Radically Improve Organizational Culture

InclusionHuman Resources OfficersTeam Performance

Article

May 14, 2024

8 min

InclusionHuman Resources OfficersTeam Performance

Executive summary

When employees feel inspired, connected, and able to be authentic at work, perceptions of leadership capability and organizational success improve.

Close

Despite being important to organizational success, employee wellbeing is often difficult for leaders to define and take action on.

Wellbeing goes beyond a healthy work-life balance and competitive pay—it encompasses individual experiences, manager perceptions, and organizational culture and performance. SHRM research shows that organizations that foster a positive work environment have lower turnover, thereby retaining talented and motivated employees. For leaders looking to retain top talent, this holistic view is crucial.

To bring more clarity to the wellbeing conversation, Russell Reynolds Associates ran a correlation analysis of our recent Divides & Dividends sustainability survey. We then identified three attributes that contribute to an employee’s sense of wellbeing within their organization.

Employee wellbeing is determined by whether an individual feels:

Inspired by the people they work with;

Included in the culture of the company; and

That they do not have to sacrifice who they are to be successful at the organization.

We found that only about half of employees (54%) identify as having “high wellbeing”—meaning they strongly agree/agree with the statements above.

While employers often focus on addressing employees with a low sense of wellbeing—understandable, as these employees feel 4x less impactful in their roles compared to those with high wellbeing—they actually account for a relatively small portion of organizations (6%).

Instead, organizations have the greatest opportunity with what we call the “vital middle”—the 40 % of employees who report having medium wellbeing. And this middling sense of wellbeing has a significant effect—employees in this category feel half as impactful as those who report high wellbeing (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Employee wellbeing across employees globally

Source: RRA Divides & Dividends 2023, N = 8,193 employees globally, N = 4,427 employees high wellbeing, N = 3,286 employees medium wellbeing, N = 480 employees low wellbeing

This presents a massive engagement opportunity for leaders. While this 40% of employees may not be thriving, they are already at least partially engaged in the organization and have the potential to make a significant impact—with the right support from leadership. A small investment in employee wellbeing can go a long way.

While these   attributes may not directly impact more concrete metrics (such as organizational or manager performance), employee perception contributes to productivity, reputation, and net promoter scores. Via learnings from this analysis, we offer the following data-backed insights into how organizations can accelerate their employee wellbeing efforts:

Employees with high wellbeing are significantly more likely to report clarity around their work environment. Aligning goals and objectives across all levels of the organization is crucial to ensure a unified direction.

Managers play a crucial role in fostering honesty, inclusion, and employee wellbeing. Employees who see their manager challenging unethical behavior, being transparent and honest, and vocalizing issues of discrimination and inequality are more likely to report high wellbeing.

High wellbeing improves employee’s confidence in organizational performance. Wellbeing directly impacts how employees perceive overall organizational performance. By taking steps to ensure that employees feel inspired, connected, and able to be authentic at work, organizations can enhance confidence and engagement.

Employees with high wellbeing are significantly more likely to report clarity around their work environment

Most employees with high wellbeing (82%) feel that their role objectives are clear. Conversely, less than half (47%) of employees with medium wellbeing agree (Figure 2). In addition, 89% of employees with high wellbeing feel that they have the right team of people around them to enable good decision making, compared to only 55% of employees with medium wellbeing.

This underscores the importance of fostering wellbeing at the individual level. Not only does it create a healthier experience for employees, but it also enhances clarity, teamwork, and access to crucial information.

Figure 2: How employee wellbeing impacts job experience

Source: RRA Divides & Dividends 2023, N = 8,193 employees globally, N = 4,427 employees high wellbeing, N = 3286 employees medium wellbeing, N = 480 employees low wellbeing

Managers play a crucial role in fostering honesty, inclusion, and employee wellbeing

Employees who see their manager challenging unethical behavior, being transparent and honest, and vocalizing issues of discrimination and inequality are 1.4x more likely to report high wellbeing.

Across four manager behavior dimensions we measured, employees with high wellbeing were more likely to report that their managers display behaviors that help create a positive work environment (Figure 3). Employees with high wellbeing are more likely to report that their manager honestly acknowledges both successes and failures than those with medium levels of wellbeing (65% vs 49%). Related, those with high wellbeing were also more likely to agree that their manager effectively vocalizes issues of discrimination and bias than their medium wellbeing counterparts (56% vs 41%).

These disparities highlight the major impact that managers have on their employee’s wellbeing. As such, senior leaders should prioritize open and honest employee relationships. According to Gallup research, managers account for at least 70% of the variance in employee engagement scores—and engaged employees are more productive, loyal, and committed to the organization’s success.

Figure 3: How direct managers impact employee wellbeing

Source: RRA Divides & Dividends 2023, N = 8,193 employees globally, N = 4,427 employees high wellbeing, N = 3286 employees medium wellbeing, N = 480 employees low wellbeing

High wellbeing influences employee’s confidence in organizational performance

In 2023, employees with high wellbeing were 1.4x more confident in their organization’s performance than those with medium wellbeing (Figure 4). When taking a long-term view, 88% of employees with high wellbeing express confidence in their organization’s future success, compared with 66% of those with medium wellbeing.

This highlights the link between employee wellbeing and retention. Those who have better experiences at work have simultaneously better expectations around their organization’s future—meaning they’re more engaged in the organization and ideally less likely to leave.

Figure 4: How employee wellbeing impacts organizational performance perceptions

Source: RRA Divides & Dividends 2023, N = 8,193 employees globally, N = 4,427 employees high wellbeing, N = 3286 employees medium wellbeing, N = 480 employees low wellbeing

How to harness employee wellbeing to improve organizational success

In the future of work, employee wellbeing is a non-negotiable. Leaders looking to enact meaningful improvements to employee wellbeing and their organization’s success should consider the following:

Ensure that employee wellbeing (or related outcomes like engagement and retention) is incorporated into the objectives of senior leaders and managers.

Clearly communicate the organization's commitment to wellbeing by stating concrete goals and integrating them across business units.

Allocate resources and investments towards cultural practices that support employee wellbeing.

Empower employees to contribute to goals: clarify objectives and expectations for employees, ensuring clear roles and responsibilities with autonomy and flexibility where possible.

Purposefully and consistently recognize employee achievements.

Regularly assess, monitor, and prioritize organizational culture  to better assess if employees feel safe enough to bring their full selves to work. Solicit ongoing feedback, proactive support programs, and a culture that values work-life balance and mental health.

Methodology

Divides and Dividends 2023

Divides and Dividends explores the extent to which organizations are integrating success into their business strategy and operations and what actions are linked to perceptions of progress. It is based on an online survey of 3,813 senior leaders and 8,753 employees across 105 countries, which was carried out between May 2, 2023, and May 18, 2023. Samples are weighted by country gross domestic product in USD based on 2022 International Monetary Fund statistics. Not all percentages in charts add up to 100% as a result of rounding percentages and the decision in certain cases to exclude the display of certain groups and “neither/nor,” “other,” “none of the above,” and “don’t know” responses.

Employee Wellbeing

“Employees” are those who are:

Currently full-time or part-time employed.

Reporting to someone below the C-suite (such as reporting to a department head, VP, business unit head, senior director, director, team lead, manager, or senior team member).

Located in either the United Kingdom, United States, Australia, China, Germany, France, Spain, Mexico, Brazil, India, Denmark, Finland, or Sweden.

Employees with high wellbeing are those with an average score on a 5-point agreement scale (Strongly agree=5, agree=4, neutral=3, disagree=2, strongly disagree=1) between 3-5 points  on the following three concepts. Employees with medium wellbeing are those with an average score between 2-3, and employees with low wellbeing are those with an average score of 1-2.

Reflecting on your experience in your current role, to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:

I feel a part of the culture of my company

The people I work with inspire me to do my best work

I do not have to sacrifice who I am to be successful

Authors

Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.
Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Brussels.
Gabrielle Lieberman is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.
Peter Pickus leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment and Development Knowledge team. He is based in Washington DC.

Learn more about the authors and The Center for Leadership Insight

Further RRA Reading

Divides and Dividends 2023

Leadership actions for a more sustainable future

The New Wellness at Work

Improving Culture via Employee Well-being

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices