The Fourth Q—What It Is and Why It’s Essential for a High-Performing C-suite | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Fourth Q—What It Is and Why It’s Essential for a High-Performing C-suite

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionLeadershipCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryCulture AnalyticsInclusion and CultureTeam Performance

Article

April 18, 2024

5 min

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionLeadershipCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryCulture AnalyticsInclusion and CultureTeam Performance

Executive summary

Having a high trust quotient (TQ) is a critical component of an effective C-suite. We explain how CEOs can create an environment of trust within their top team.

Close

Emma Combe

London

Dee Symons

London

The leadership landscape has evolved. Gone are the days when a leader’s intellect (IQ) and empathetic acumen (EQ) were enough for them to successfully lead organizations.

Today’s organizations demand more from their leaders. They are required to not only possess a high learning quotient (LQ), the ability to test, learn, and pivot in uncertain times, but to also have a high trust quotient or TQ (the fourth Q)—the ability to be relied upon and to be truthful. While IQ, EQ, and LQ are easier to identify and quantify, knowing whether a CEO is trusted (TQ) can be more difficult to determine.

Trust is the foundation for all effective relationships—professional or personal. It’s the glue that holds C-suite teams together. It’s the currency that enables collaboration.

When trust is present, it can be a key indicator of long-term organizational success. We found that leaders at high-performing organizations were over eight times more likely to feel that their C-suite displays a level of trust that’s visible across multiple areas of the organization.

Creating an environment of trust is one of the most important things you can do as a CEO. But, we’ve found that trust is broken across C-suites. According to our research, only 22% of C-suite members say that they trust their team.

When trust is lost, it’s impossible to ignore. Sometimes this loss of trust can be catastrophic and quick—when a CEO goes back on their word, or is deliberately dishonest, for example. But, often, a loss of trust can creep into a team over time and can be difficult to spot. In both situations, trust takes time to rebuild.

Four key quotients to be an effective CEO

Intelligence quotient
A leader’s ability to think logically and solve problems.

Emotional quotient
A leader’s ability to understand, use, and manage emotions in a positive way.

Learning quotient
A leader’s ability to learn, adapt, and change.

Trust quotient
A leader’s ability to be relied upon and be truthful.

4 ways you can create an environment of trust within your C-suite

How do you address a lack of trust in your C-suite? Ultimately, it’s a problem that only you, as a CEO, can solve. But, that doesn’t mean trust is something that can be demanded or expected—it’s an evolutionary process and can only be built when a CEO leads by example and champions the right behaviors.

Here, we explore the actions that you can take to build up stores of this essential leadership capital and improve trust in your top team.

1. Foster inclusive and transparent leadership

Some CEOs approach leadership with a divide-and-conquer mentality, actively promoting tension in their senior leadership team. They want executives to challenge each other’s ideas, in the hope that it will drive competition, while also protecting the CEO from challenge.

But in fact, the most effective CEOs do the complete opposite—they find ways to unite their team. One surefire way to do this is by sharing information with the entire C-suite, not just a select few. When everyone feels that they’re treated the same, it reduces competition, cultivates trust, and allows your C-suite team to effectively work together.

Transparency is also key as CEO. Sharing both bad news and good news requires courage. But being honest and showing vulnerability when you do have bad news to share not only builds trust, it demonstrates that you’re human.

Role modeling honesty, transparency, and inclusivity will encourage your top team to do the same. It will allow for better collaboration, while also giving your team the space and security to take risks and innovate without fear of failure or finger-pointing.

2. Avoid ‘control and command’ style leadership

For decades, many CEOs possessed a hierarchal and rigid ‘command and control’ style mentality. It was a time when the CEO’s word reigned supreme and the title alone garnered respect and deference. This style of leadership doesn’t work today, nor does it foster trust across the C-suite.

Today’s successful CEOs serve the organizations and the people they lead. They are collaborators in chief. They actively listen to their team and have self-awareness and empathy. When your top team feels heard and valued, they’re more likely to trust you and feel comfortable bringing up concerns or sharing ideas. Taking the time to listen to your team’s perspectives and feedback can make a huge difference in fostering collaboration and stopping mistrust from taking root.

3. Be consistent

Trust is also built through consistency, predictability, and reliability. Part of your role as CEO is to do what you say and say what you mean. Demonstrating that you can fulfill commitments and promises is a straightforward yet powerful way to establish trust.

You will not always make the right decisions. There will be moments when you have a lapse in judgment or make the wrong decision. After all, we’re all human. As long as your C-suite executives know what to expect from you more often than not, it creates a sense of psychological safety and stability—essential components when building trust.

4. Hire wide T-shaped leaders

In the past, CEOs hired executives with deep expertise in a certain function or geography. But, this approach can often mean your C-suite is focused on fighting for resources for their departments, rather than solving enterprise-wide issues such as sustainability and tech transformation.

As the former professional basketball player, coach, and executive, Phil Jackson concisely articulated, “Good teams become great ones when the members trust each other enough to surrender the ‘me’ for the ‘we.’”

Instead, it’s wise for CEOs to hire wide T-shaped leaders—executives who have deep functional expertise in one domain (the vertical stroke of the T), while also having the ability to effectively collaborate across disciplines with experts from other areas (the horizontal stroke of the T).

These leaders will have the ability and willingness to consider how decisions impact the wider business context and connect to the strategy. This mindset will allow them to make balanced assessments, and take actions that don’t inhibit the organization’s ability to succeed.

So, as you build your top team, look for and assess wide T-shaped leaders. It will be a powerful way to not only drive enterprise performance, but it will also aid collaboration and allow trust to flourish.

Authors

Emma Combe is a member of Russell Reynolds’s Associates Board & CEO practice. She is based in London.
Dee Symons is a member of Russell Reynolds’s Associates Board & CEO practice. She is based in London.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices