The Sustainability Accelerators That Will Fast-Track Progress | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Sustainability Accelerators That Will Fast-Track Progress

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability Officers

Article

Constantine Alexandrakis

October 17, 2023

3 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

As organizations now embrace ambitious sustainability commitments, we set out how leaders can turn these pledges into true action on the ground.

Close

Constantine Alexandrakis

Chicago

In recent years we’ve seen organizations the world over set ambitious targets at epic scale—something that was unimaginable just five or 10 years ago.

The million-dollar question, however, is just how much of this talk is translating into tangible and lasting change?

Our recent research shows that for all the talk about sustainability, there remains a big (and stubborn) disparity between what leaders are saying and what they are doing.

It shows that:

80% of senior leaders have created concrete sustainability plans.

70% are confident they’ll meet their sustainability targets.

59% expect to make continued progress on sustainability.

So far, so good.

But when we looked a little closer, we found that leaders were yet to integrate sustainability across their organizations.

They aren’t embedding it across their strategy, operations, or leadership.

They aren’t holding their executive teams accountable for action.

And they aren’t harnessing the power of their employees to accelerate progress.

In other words, leaders and their organizations are still in the early stages of their journeys toward more sustainable business practices.

And it’s no wonder: sustainability transformation is hard.

Yet we do know through our research that there are certain actions leaders can take to fast-track progress.

In fact, they need to close four key divides in thinking and skill sets.

This isn’t just theory. Our research (and experience) shows that when leaders zero in on these areas, they go much further, much faster.

The Motivation Divide. Most leaders view sustainability as a brand-building exercise: 69% see this as a top-five benefit of sustainability action, while just 19% cite faster top-line growth. Yet a switch in mindset can yield big results: when leaders see sustainability as an opportunity to create value for their business and communities, they are 1.4 times more likely to say sustainability progress has been made and will continue to be made.

The Leadership Divide. Senior leaders say their CEOs are committed to sustainability action, but just 45% think they drive the innovation needed to make the organization more sustainable. We know from experience that the CEOs who have made the most progress on sustainability have the vision (and courage) to challenge the status quo. And our research backs that up. When senior leaders believe their CEO possesses this bold, disruptive mindset they are 3.2x more likely to report progress has been made and will continue to be made.

The Accountability Divide. In the rush to make visible commitments to sustainability and set ambitious goals, organizations are overlooking a critical step: ensuring their executive teams are incentivized to make change happen—and stick. Just 35% of senior leaders say they have clear sustainability objectives. Yet those who do are 1.5x more likely to say progress has been made and will continue to be made.

The Mobilization Divide. Employees are eager to play a leading role in sustainability. Yet our research shows senior leaders are missing multiple opportunities to harness their collective potential. Just 10% of employees frequently discuss sustainability objectives with their managers. Yet when employees have the resources to advance their companies’ sustainability goals, they are 1.9x more likely to say sustainability progress has been made and will continue to be made.

Clearly, leaders will increasingly find themselves under the spotlight, not just in the wake of Climate Week, but in the decade ahead.

And while there are no short-cuts, we are getting a clearer view of exactly what it takes for leaders to pivot their organizations toward a more sustainable future. We are heeding these lessons on our own sustainability journey. And we are excited to share these lessons as you embark on yours.

Divides and Dividends 2023

Leadership actions for a more sustainable future

Read the full report

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices