HealthTech Leaders: Are You Prepared to Handle the  Implications of Generative AI? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

HealthTech Leaders: Are You Prepared to Handle the  Implications of Generative AI?

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationHealthcareTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

Noël Auguston

October 16, 2023

5 min

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationHealthcareTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

As generative AI gains traction across the healthtech landscape, leaders must consider how it impacts their talent strategies.

Close

Noël Auguston

Boston

Though artificial intelligence (AI) has long been used in healthcare to synthesize data in clinical and non-clinical settings, ChatGPT, a large language model (LLM) chatbot has taken the world—and healthtech industry—by storm.  According to September 2023 McKinsey research, generative AI could add the equivalent of $2.6 trillion to $4.4 trillion in annual economic benefits across 63 use cases. Generative AI is poised to make huge impacts in all areas of healthtech, from innovative drug discovery to efficiencies in patient care to reducing errors in back-end office procedures.

Russell Reynolds Associates spoke with several technology and product leaders from innovative healthtech companies to learn more about the immediate generative AI implementations and talent strategies their organizations are considering to ensure success.

While it’s impossible to know the extent of generative AI’s implications yet, interviewees agreed upon one thing: organizations across the healthtech ecosystem are working toward, if not already succeeding in, broadening their offerings to incorporate generative AI.

How generative AI will change healthtech

Experts in the healthtech industry agree that generative AI has tremendous potential in both clinical and nonclinical settings. However, most acknowledge that immediate uses will occur within nonclinical settings, improving back-office processes for payers and providers alike. The healthcare industry typically isn’t a first-mover on innovative technologies, due to the regulatory nature of the industry; clinical settings rightly require more testing, compliance, and approvals before LLMs can be fully integrated.

The below chart shows some of the common generative AI use cases in healthtech, and their immediate impact and technical complexity involved to implement.

Once leaders determine which use cases will be most relevant to their organization, they must then adapt their talent strategy and requirements around generative AI.

Five Talent and Organizational Observations of Generative AI in Healthtech

Generative AI is still new, and leaders are only beginning to uncover its long-term business impacts. As such, it’s too early to differentiate talent trends specific to the healthcare industry; many behaviors and requirements mirror what we observe across organizations in all sectors. However, here are five ways that we’ve seen generative AI impact healthtech’s organizational and talent landscape so far:

1. Generative AI implementations are unlikely to lead to new C-suite roles: We have not seen new C-suite roles solely dedicated to generative AI in healthtech yet. Instead, companies are harnessing innovation power within their existing leadership structures by augmenting desired qualifications. CEOs are tasking chief technology officers or chief data and analytics officers with leading the charge on integrating generative AI into their organizations. However, as new technology executives are hired in clinical settings, educational and prior career requirements will shift toward a blend of technology and science.

2. Companies outsource LLM development: Rather than building LLMs in-house, we are seeing healthtech companies partner with tech giants like Microsoft and Amazon to tailor existing models to their own organizational needs. These partnerships are critical to implementing generative AI use cases at speed. A powerful example of this collaboration is exemplified by EHR titan Epic Systems and Microsoft’s Azure OpenAI Service, who announced their partnership in April 2023. Microsoft’s services will enable efficiencies in clinical workflow through suggested text and summaries, increase medical coding and billing accuracy, and fill gaps in clinical data sets. Eventually, competitive advantage from generative AI may come from internally-built LLMs which will, of course, require specific skills from engineering talent.

3. Secure data pipelines for collection and aggregation of data are critical: As companies install LLMs, they will need large volumes of data to train their generative AI models, as well as enhanced security measures to protect said data. While data privacy is already an important tenet of any healthcare organization, this new use of patient data may require additional safeguards and training for those who may have not previously dealt with sensitive data. Leaders may reposition technology teams within the organization, and strive for an organizational structure that promotes access to and collaboration with security leaders. Increased communication around security will foster proactive problem-solving, manage risk, and prevent mistakes.

4. Business logic must work hand-in-hand with advances in technology: In order to yield the desired output from generative AI platforms, users must ask the right questions to guide the tool. Prompt engineering tasks will require technologists to develop their business logic skills. In healthtech specifically, prompt engineers will need to develop an understanding of healthcare’s business nuances. Those working on back-office, administrative applications will need to have a clear understanding of medical coding and billing processes. Prompt engineers working in clinical and research settings will need to have a scientific background, and may have a degree in computational biology or computational chemistry. The mastery of generative AI will require skillsets that blur the lines between technology, healthcare acumen, business expertise, and leadership.

5. Executive leadership must be able to manage the changes that generative AI will bring, while also preserving their existing culture: In an industry as personal as healthtech, engaged and articulate commercial leaders will be necessary for external consumer adoption and acceptance of generative AI. From electronic health records (EHRs), to wearables and sensors, to clinical trials, organizations are collecting and analyzing patient data in greater quantities than ever before. Patients need to trust that their data will be used and guarded responsibly, while still feeling the human connection with their care providers. Internally, for employees to embrace new innovations, leaders need to consider how to wield these new tools ethically and efficiently, investing in proper training around how generative AI will augment and accelerate their work. Human-centered leadership will be integral to AI’s effectiveness and long-term acceptance.

As generative AI remains at the top of healthtech leaders’ minds, they must be prepared to support their people through upcoming transitions, augmenting their executive teams and frontline employees with the right skillsets to succeed. By demonstrating agility, collaboration, and flexibility around role responsibilities, leaders can build trust and communication across their organizations as they explore this new era of intelligence.

Authors

Hope Cummins is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare Knowledge team. She is based in San Francisco.
Noël Auguston leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare Technology practice. She is based in Boston.

For further reading on the Generative AI revolution at large, see the following RRA articles:

Navigating the Generative AI Revolution: Five Key Focus Areas for Leading into the Future

Find out more

How will ChatGPT and Other Generative AI Impact Leadership?

Find out more

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices