Decoding the Future:  The RRA Systems View on Leading Through AI Transformation | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Decoding the Future: The RRA Systems View on Leading Through AI Transformation

Technology and InnovationBoard Composition and SuccessionGrowth and ScalingTransformation and InnovationArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

August 22, 2024

13 min

Technology and InnovationBoard Composition and SuccessionGrowth and ScalingTransformation and InnovationArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

Informed by our AI Leadership Labs series, RRA has developed a comprehensive approach to leading organizations through AI transformation.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Tristan Jervis

London

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

The rise of AI isn’t just about implementing new tools—we are in the realm of full business model transformation, fundamentally re-imagining the way we operate, go to market, and lead.

As AI brings a seismic shift to the way we work, leaders need to rethink how their organizations fundamentally operate. Recently, McKinsey reported a 341% increase in generative AI (GenAI) roles over the last two years, with demand for AI talent outpacing availability by 12x. From automotive manufacturing to autonomous mobility, retail to ecommerce, media to streaming, and banking to fintech, leaders across industries are re-designing their business model around technology and AI, with large corporations transforming at a pace increasingly similar to fast-moving disruptors. AI has raised $122 billion of equity investment in 2023 alone, developing use cases that have the potential to generate an annual value of $2.6 – $4.4 trillion.1

These changes have massive implications for organizations and the people who lead them. To keep pace with the changing needs of our clients, Russell Reynolds Associates hosted over 50 group CEOs and CHROs in our AI Leadership Labs roundtable series. In partnership with Harvard Business School, we discussed GenAI’s increasing impact on organizations and the leadership challenges that acceleration presents.

Read on to uncover how trailblazing CEOs are developing strategies to tackle the AI opportunity head-on, and RRA’s comprehensive view on leading your organization through the AI transformation.

Why is now a unique moment in time?

Leaders have grappled with transformation for decades now. First, the advent of the internet allowed access to information and communication at never-seen-before seen speeds. Then, digital transformation created efficiencies internally and externally, from supply chain to customer experience to online sales platforms. The next wave involved large traditional corporates competing with—and looking ever more similar to—new powerful digital entrants to the market.

Now, we have the advent of GenAI. If the internet reduced the cost of information transition to 0, GenAI is applying those same reductions to cognition and problem-solving.

Figure 1: The accelerating pace of technological change in organizations

With every new technology, the pace of change increases. And while GenAI is another technology in the arsenal of tech-change weaponry, it also represents an inflection point—the likes of which we haven’t seen since the popularization of the internet. Between this inflection point and tech’s exponential acceleration, there has never been such opportunity for fundamental business model transformation.

What AI-related challenges are keeping our clients up at night?

Leaking Value

"We will become obsolete to companies that are moving much faster than us on the development side, and indispensable to those moving more slowly."

In the age of digital transformation, new digital initiatives required a large team of tech experts to make change happen. In the age of GenAI, change and innovation is accessible to anyone—even those beyond your organization. Suddenly, two people in a home garage will have the same power to build a digital platform as a large corporation – or, as one CEO neatly put it: “What we do can now be replicated; that’s the biggest threat.”

During our AI Leadership Labs series, many CEOs shared concerns of value leakage. For organizations with a platform model or that are built on information/data, it may become challenging to stay relevant. This has started a trend towards disintermediation, in which traditional players can bypass smaller tech/digital players that they may have previously relied upon for technology-heavy services (analytics, website design, cyber security, engineering, AI, etc.), building them in-house instead.

Unprecedented Pace

For leaders, the question should not be: “Do we have time to learn and transform?” When it comes to AI, organizations have no choice.

That’s what one Harvard professor said when discussing this unprecedented pace of transformation. A CHRO attendee added: “The pace and rate of change has never moved as fast as it is now; the things we discussed 12 months ago are already irrelevant, and the change curve is exponential.”

Instead, the question should be: “What steps can we take today to ensure we’re preparing our organization and the people within it for the challenges of tomorrow?"

The majority of leaders globally have taken at least an initial step to implement GenAI (Figure 2). We have observed CEOs of smaller tech-driven businesses transform their entire tech stack overnight through an AI-enabled “cloning” process, which involves rebuilding technology from scratch, leveraging a team of outsourced engineers, then reintegrating it into their businesses – thereby bypassing years of change and disruption.

Figure 2: Where organizations are on their GenAI journey

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n= 1,382

Despite moving at this breakneck speed, these CEOs are simultaneously weighing the long-term impacts of their organization’s AI decisions – or as one Labs attendee put it, weighing the paranoia of getting it wrong against the immense pressure to do something quickly.

Only 7% of leaders think their organization is moving too quickly in its generative AI implementation.

51% of CEOs are concerned about being held accountable for the negative impact of an AI driven decision in the future.

31% of leaders globally still have yet to take any steps towards implementing GenAI.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,728

Managing change and culture shifts

"Change is 30% technology; 70% culture and transformation.”

Transforming businesses and keeping pace with the AI revolution necessitates a culture of innovation, curiosity, and learning, with a shame free try-fast/fail-fast mentality. But getting to that point will be difficult.

Leaders should prepare for an element of shame—both from employees who do not yet understand the technology or opportunities, as well as from those hiding their AI skills (lest they look indolent).

Trust will also be key. Without it, employees won’t support the transformation goals, as they may fear they’re training their AI replacements.

Finally, this change will require constant upskilling and reskilling. The continually accelerating pace of change will mean that employees will have to learn more quickly and frequently than ever before.

The Long Road to ROI

As with all new technology (most recently VR and blockchain), hype and optimism can often far precede any real change or return on investment, causing frustration and dejection. Before the tech is ready for prime-time, organizations have to find use cases, willing participants, and budget to scale—all while countering resistance to change, upskilling needs, and demanding transformation management. Those doing this best are concurrently running organic and inorganic innovation via internal crowdsourcing and access to new technology, also creating centralized innovation hubs of tech and business talent.

New leadership requirements

"You can’t CEO this. When it comes to AI transformation, everyone needs to be engaged.”

The leadership profile and remit across all functions, at every level, will soon start to look very different. First, skillsets and competencies including change management, systems thinking, adaptability, rapid learning, and resilience will come to the fore. Second, the leadership team will have to build an enterprise mindset, collaborating and supporting each other’s goals, focusing on the success of the organization and mission, rather than of the individual.

AI Leadership Labs attendees reiterated that, when it comes to AI transformation, CEOs will have to work many levels down in the organization and in close partnership with those who understand AI, building a cabinet of advisors around them from consultants to technology experts to board directors.

76% of leaders believe a strong understanding of generative AI will be a required skill for the future C-suite

But only 37% are confident they have the right skills to help implement AI

Only 35% agree their organization has forward-thinking leadership who align resources to harness the power of generative AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,728

So how can leaders effectively tackle what’s next? A systems view for AI leadership transformation

Our AI Leadership Labs series has helped us create, test, and revise the RRA Systems View on AI Leadership Transformation.

While acknowledging that AI is the next weapon in a well-stocked tech-transformation arsenal, it does differ in one key respect: while digital transformation required daunting costs, scaling, and armies of technologists to implement and integrate digital technologies across vast and complex organizations, much of the GenAI opportunity is in the hands of the entire organization from day one. The most powerful approach to transformation equips the entire organization with the tools and leadership to drive change across the business at every level.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI Leadership Labs proprietary analysis, 2024

Re-imagine the business

Now is the time for radical change, rather than simply upgrading the edges of the business.

Take Blockbuster, a famed loser of digital transformation. Blockbuster refused to transform and found themselves losing out to the likes of Netflix. Less known are the myriad of companies who did transform, but still fell short: for example, Barnes and Noble built an ecommerce platform and invested in technology, but fundamentally kept its core business the same.

We advise leaders to scenario plan for how AI connects to their broader business transformation, and use that to imagine an AI-enabled future over a long term horizon, with radical product innovation.

CEO enablement

CEOs looking to get smart on AI have created a “cabinet” of AI advisors around them, either informally or via a formal advisory board. Members of this AI advisory cabinet may include transformation experts (AI experts, general managers, and consultants); those who bring technical or visionary experience (entrepreneurs, technologists, and academics); or even strategists specializing in acquisition. This makes it easier to incorporate AI into strategic and operating discussions across the board and leadership team.

A great example of a successful AI cabinet occurred at the GenAI powerhouse Microsoft, where CEO Satya Nadella has surrounded himself with AI experts, partnering with OpenAI and proselytizing a “learn-it-all,” (rather than “know-it-all”) culture.2 Labs attendees discussed emulating tech giants like Microsoft, Amazon, and Google, while also working closely with technology talent across their organizations.

65% of CEOs believe AI will fundamentally change how leaders operate

62% of CEOs are excited about AI’s potential to create new revenue streams in their organization

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,662

C-suite redesign

Core to AI enablement is an ‘enterprise mindset’ across the C-suite, in which leaders focus on the success of the team and the company, rather than on their specific function’s prowess.

First, leaders must design a future-facing success profile for every function and role. Then, assess current capabilities against the leadership needs of the future. Following this, encourage each function to support other functions in their missions, and underpin them all with technology/digital capabilities (Figure 3).

We spoke to one consumer retail company CEO who had personally been facilitating connections across functions, fostering team unity over self-promotion in an enterprise mindset push. We also spoke to a consumer digital platform leader who standardized the technology that was available to each corporate function (e.g., data visualization platforms), so that teams could learn and upskill together. We also spoke to an education charity who enhanced cross functional teaming by ensuring that enterprise technology transformation projects were led by business leaders, rather than technology functional leaders.

Figure 3: Shifting from an expertise focus to an AI-enabled enterprise mindset

63% of leaders think they need to adjust the way they think about hiring people when thinking about AI. Only 7% disagree.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,383

Board composition

The last decade has seen a dramatic increase in technical board directors, from CEO and GM technology talent, to strategy and M&A advisors, and now increasingly to CIO, CTO, CDO and equivalent talent. Organizations should appoint an AI systems thinker with relevant industry context, while also accelerating upskilling and training for existing board members around AI. Boards should aim for strategic and technological balance, not over-indexing on tech visionaries who can’t also bring business experience.

There are countless good examples of successful organizations appointing strong digital board talent, often not stopping at one or two technology experts (Figure 4). Walmart, for example, has appointed board members with experience from PayPal, AT&T, Univision Communications, Nextdoor Holdings, Altaba, and Google. Airbus recently appointed Dr Feiyu Xu, a leading figure in the world of AI, to their board. Not all companies have opted for such a direct solution; one gaming company has invested heavily in developing certain board members’ AI understanding, rather than engaging in the process of creating a space on the board; and one global information services organization is extending the charter of their audit committee to include responsible AI, while also appointing product & infrastructure talent to their board.

Figure 4: AI-savvy board directors can focus on multiple areas

Only 20% agree their organization has the right expertise on the board to advise on generative AI implementation

68% of CEOs say they need better perspective and expertise on their board related to AI

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,676

AI enablement

Good data is the bedrock of functional AI. But currently, many organizations’ data is disconnected, with functions and business units picking from it as needed. For AI to be effective, organizations need a central data store, with silos being left to the last possible moment of analysis.

As the majority of industry leaders still lack confidence in their employees’ technical AI skills (Figure 5), immediately establishing the right data infrastructure and expertise is key.

Only 22% of non-tech sectors agree they have the right technical skills or people in-house required to implement generative AI solutions. In the Technology Sector this increases to a still low 43%.

Figure 5: Leaders’ confidence in their employees’ technical AI skills by industry

% leaders agreeing that their organization has the right technical skills or people in-house required to implement generative AI solutions

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor, n=1,676

First, leaders must upgrade their data infrastructure, centralizing it and elevating their data governance. Then, they should build the AI capability and innovate around agreed use cases, which thereafter will maximize a partnership with AI platform organizations to dramatically increase capability and scale.

One particularly interesting story came from a small MedTech company CEO, who discussed how he had hired a team of outsourced AI developers to re-build their tech stack from scratch. Once built, they re-integrated it into their existing business, therefore saving years of arduous transformation and change management. At the other end of the spectrum, we spoke to a $50 billion pharmaceutical company who had moved 80% of their data to the cloud, integrating the data and re-engineering their platforms to embed AI, then hiring a senior AI leader to oversee the transformation.

How our clients are tackling the AI challenge

Source: Russell Reynods Associates’ AI Leadership Labs proprietary analysis, 2024

Rethink culture and approach to learning

Develop a culture of innovation, free from shame or fear of failure. This can be achieved by giving all employees the tools needed to get to a basic understanding of AI and the opportunities it provides. Find champions of AI in the organization and make them more visible. These can include senior leadership, who themselves must demonstrate leadership commitment to AI by leveraging tools at the top. A successful AI and digital transformation strategy must be holistic, integrating technology with cultural and learning initiatives to build a resilient and innovative workforce. This involves continuous investment in talent development, fostering a culture of experimentation and agility, and ensuring that ethical considerations are at the forefront of AI deployment.

We spoke to an information services company who launched AI-powered products within their organization, and opened an innovation pilot to 4000 employees. We also spoke to several organizations who instituted mandatory AI trainings across the organization, from the board of directors down to the shop floor. One AI consultant discussed bringing the employee base on board by identifying willing and energized AI champions to make more visible in the organization, finding quick wins leveraging AI to tackle boring or tough areas of the role, and over-communicating the benefits and long term opportunities at every step.

A phased approach to AI business transformation

Many CEOs in our AI Leadership Labs shared the overwhelming scale of the AI challenge. And with other pressing topics from sustainability to macro-economic challenges all competing for air-time, it’s easy to see how decision paralysis can arise.

Those who have managed AI transformations best noted tackling the challenge incrementally, starting by supporting the CEO in leading the AI conversation, then integrating AI into all strategic discussions. This is then supplemented by bringing in AI-savvy leadership—from the board of directors down to the factory floor, all with access to AI tools and the requisite training to be successful, and then publicly championing and showcasing their success.

How we are helping our clients engage with AI’s opportunities:

AI Transformation: AI-led transformation advisory, supporting boards and CEOs as they reimagine their business and associated leadership challenges

AI Functional Leadership: Partnering with organizations to find pivotal AI leaders who can strategize with and implement AI technologies

AI Infrastructure & Platforms: Supporting the growth and scaling of platform, data, and technology companies underpinning the rise of AI technology

Authors

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.
Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in London.
Harpreet Khurana is the Chief Digital and Data Analytics Officer at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in New York.
Tuck Rickards is a senior member and former leader of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. He is based in San Francisco.
Amy Scissons is the Chief Marketing and Communications Officer at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in New York.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices