Allyship in Action: Paving the Path to Equality | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Allyship in Action: Paving The Path To Equality

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionTechnology

Article

December 04, 2023

3 min

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionTechnology

Executive Search

Last month, Ziff Davis invited colleagues from RRA to lead a panel discussion on Allyship in Action: Paving the Path to Equality.

Close

Margot McShane

San Francisco

Bradlee Benn

New York

This event emphasized the significance of promoting diversity and inclusion, understanding unconscious bias and its negative effects, and actively advocating for change in the workplace.

Below is a video recap of the event, and a summary of the most common challenges that were discussed and the tips our leadership advisors offered to address them.

PLAY VIDEO

Courage and compassion are key to ensuring every voice is heard.

Based on a survey of the group, the most common scenario where women experience gender bias in the workplace is one where male colleagues do not actively listen or actually hear the input that women offer in meetings. If you are experiencing this, be courageous in seeking support from influential colleagues. Senior leaders can take action to address this by creating extra space for their colleagues to have their voices heard. Setting a tone of respect and advocating for those with less power is important.

Unconscious bias leads to inequity and must be addressed.

Employees can help mitigate bias and be better allies to underrepresented groups by being curious and open to new experiences; attending events, meetings and networking events that are not intended for them and are outside of their traditional groups; and seeking feedback to hear unvarnished truths and learn from diverse perspectives. These actions can allow for real-time feedback and help form natural relationships rooted in observation.

Having diverse perspectives strengthens decision-making and widens perspectives.

People have different experiences that they can bring to complex situations. Intentionally allowing for more diverse perspectives in creative problem solving can help to move businesses forward. It is always good to keep checking and expanding network; you never know what piece is missing.

Embrace strategies to expand your leadership succession pipeline.

To achieve more representation of underrepresented groups among senior leadership ranks, we have challenged clients to broaden the aperture in leadership success profiles and look for alternative attributes to solve what they are looking for. Clearly define indicators of high-quality performance for women and underrepresented minorities. Strengths and attributes can be nurtured and grown; that's how you shift the succession pipeline.

Authors

Robert Alexander is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. He is based in New York City.

Bradlee Benn is co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Advisory practice. He is based in New York.

Jemi Crookes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. She is based in Washington, D.C.

Dana Landis is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment, Culture and Development practice. She is based in San Francisco.

Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners group and Women on Boards initiative. She is based in San Francisco.

Sarah Reynolds is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. She is based in San Francisco.

Margaret Strauss is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice. She is based in New York.

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionLeadershipSuccessionCulture RiskConsumerEducationFinancial ServicesGovernmentHealthcareIndustrialNonprofitPrivate CapitalProfessional ServicesSocial ImpactTechnologyVenture Capital and GrowthHuman Resources OfficersInclusion and CultureAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionCulture Analytics

Why is Everybody Leaving? 8 Equitable Steps to Retain Your Diverse Talent

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices