Moving from Ambition to Action: Sustainable Operations and Supply Chains | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Moving from Ambition to Action: Sustainable Operations and Supply Chains

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationOperations and Supply Chain OfficersSustainability OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 2 authors

May 20, 2024

7 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationOperations and Supply Chain OfficersSustainability OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Are you moving sustainability from ambition to action? Our research uncovers three divides that are preventing leaders from achieving their goals.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Kurt Harrison

New York

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

Operations and supply chain leaders: you know that moving sustainability from ambition to concrete action can be difficult. You also recognize this an as immediate need; according to our Global Leadership Monitor, operations and supply chain leaders are nearly twice as likely to report climate change as a short-term risk to their businesses than they were 12 months ago. Contrary to popular belief, sustainability and climate change are no longer distant future concerns. They have become urgent short-term risks that demand immediate attention and action.

Despite this awareness, current sustainability implementation efforts are still falling short of meeting this challenge.

To better understand what’s preventing leaders in this space from taking meaningful action, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed responses to our Divides and Dividends sustainability study of 150+ C-suite operations and supply chain leaders, identifying three divides that are preventing these leaders from achieving their goals:

The implementation divide: The majority of operations and supply chain organizations lack a defined strategic plan for sustainability initiatives, and even fewer appear to be taking concrete implementation steps.

The motivation divide: The majority of these leaders struggle to view sustainability as value creation opportunity.

The experience and incentives divide: There are several key barriers to action including skills, expertise, and internal incentives.

The implementation divide

While organizations have lofty sustainability ambitions, many are still struggling to take action. For example, when comparing the net zero commitments to the actual operational greenhouse gas emission reductions (scopes 1 and 2) of the largest public and private companies over the last decade globally, Accenture found that only 18% are on track to reach net zero by 2050.1 This gap is amplified within supply chain emission (scope 3) reductions, as they are even more challenging to address and often are deprioritized by leadership teams as a result.

While concerning, this lack of progress isn’t surprising when we examine how many organizations have a clear sustainability strategy. Our survey found that less than half of operations and supply chain leaders believe their organizations have created a concrete plan or strategy for managing their sustainability issues. Even fewer organizations appear to be executing their plans: only 35% have specific processes or protocols that ensure sustainability is considered in project execution, processes, or investment decisions. Additionally, only 25% have access to clear data that evaluates sustainability outcomes in the execution of projects and processes.

Without a clear sustainability strategy or data that tracks its outcomes, supply chain leaders may find themselves unable to move past their current threshold towards their net zero commitments and other sustainability goals.

“Estimates…suggest that savings [from decarbonization] in materials alone could exceed $1 trillion a year by 2025, while potentially creating more jobs and innovation. Chief supply chain officers like myself spend the majority of our time at this convergence of supply, cost savings, talent development, and competitive differentiation.” 3

- Kevin Brown

Chief Supply Chain Officer, Dell

The motivation divide

When measured on cost alone, achieving sustainable operations and supply chains pose a significant challenge: the expected costs of meeting net zero targets alone are measured in trillions of dollars per year.2 But concurrently, achieving sustainability can also provide a significant business opportunity if considered from a costs perspective.

While leading firms have settled the business case for sustainability, the majority still struggle to articulate sustainability’s potential for value creation, with only 37% of surveyed C-suite operations and supply chain leaders seeing this as the driving force for their organization’s efforts. For the majority of these leaders, the driving force is still risk avoidance, brand management, and impact reduction. On top of this, operations and supply chain leaders tend to be more skeptical of the value creation potential than their peers (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Benefits from sustainability actions
How do you think your organization will benefit in the future from sustainability actions?
(% of senior leaders selecting as one of their top 5)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Divides and Dividends 2023, N=78 C-suite operations and supply chain leaders, N=1,992 other senior leaders.

By embracing sustainability as a value creation opportunity, organizations are more likely to seize its tangible benefits in the form of top- and bottom-line growth and increased access to capital, as well as its intangible benefits via increased employee loyalty, stronger brand equity, and a more secure social license to operate.

The experience and incentives divide

Finally, 80% of operations and supply chain leaders cite their organization’s lack of skills and expertise as a top hindrance to sustainability progress, making this the most selected barrier (Figure 2). With current hiring practices, this is unlikely to improve, as only 36% of these C-suite leaders consider sustainability in their hiring decisions. This may be a challenge of availability as much as interest; in 2023, a BCG and Microsoft study found that companies may need to upskill up to 150 million people to turn sustainability ambitions into action.4

Figure 2: Operations & supply chain leaders’ barriers to achieving sustainability progress
To what extent is each of the following issues a barrier to achieving sustainability progress?
(Total % of leaders who answered somewhat of a barrier or significant barrier)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Divides and Dividends 2023, N=85 C-suite operations and supply chain leaders.

Interestingly, the majority of C-suite operations and supply chain leaders believe they personally possess the necessary skills and expertise to move the needle: around 71% of surveyed leaders feel adequately equipped to handle current sustainability issues and 65% believe they’re prepared for future sustainability challenges. However, when paired with the current state of sustainability strategies and implementation efforts, it logically follows that these self-reported figures may be overstated.

Furthermore, these leaders are typically not incentivized to drive sustainability progress. Only 26% of surveyed C-suite operations and supply chain leaders report that their compensation is tied into sustainability goals and only 31% report that sustainability goals are part of their performance metrics (Figure 3). Moreover, 70% of these leaders believe that lack of incentives across their organizations is a barrier to progress (Figure 2).

For organizations to shift from ambitions to action, incentive systems must be re-evaluated, taking factors like the urgency of the change, the objectives timescale, and individual leaders’ levels of control into account.

Figure 3: Leadership incentives to drive sustainability progress
Which of the following statements apply to you?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Divides and Dividends 2023, N=93 C-suite operations and supply chain leaders.

Driving sustainable action: Overcoming barriers in operations and supply chains

Operations and supply chain leaders’ actions will ultimately determine whether their organization achieves its sustainability goals. As such, it’s crucial for these leaders to address the barriers outlined above. To do that, leaders should consider the following leadership and talent solutions:

Develop leadership skills and expertise: Recognize the importance of leadership skills and expertise in driving sustainability progress. While approximately two-thirds of surveyed C-suite leaders feel they possess the necessary skills and expertise, we believe this assertion is overstated. This implies that the majority of these operations and supply chain leaders may be making significant investment decisions without fully grasping the implications.

Embrace a sustainable mindset: Our research has identified four critical attributes that differentiate sustainable leaders, underpinned by the most important leadership quality: a “sustainable mindset” (Figure 4). The sustainable mindset is the purpose-driven belief that business is not a commercial activity divorced from the wider societal and environmental context in which it operates. Skills can be trained and complemented by the right team, but having an orientation towards sustainability that enables the leader to assess opportunities and risks through the lens of sustainability is even more critical.

Figure 4: The model of the sustainable leader

Source: Leadership for the Decade of Action: UN Global Compact-Russell Reynolds Associates study on the characteristics of sustainable business leaders, 2020.

Align performance and rewards: It is crucial to align performance appraisal metrics and compensation with sustainability goals. By linking rewards and incentives to sustainability outcomes, organizations can motivate and encourage C-suite leaders and employees to prioritize sustainability in their decision-making and day-to-day operations.

Upskill the workforce: Recognize the need for upskilling the workforce to address sustainability challenges effectively. This can be challenging amidst talent shortages and competing priorities, such as AI implementation, but remains critical for long term business viability.

Emphasize value creation: Operations and supply chain organizations need to embrace sustainability as a value creation opportunity, rather than an additional expense or risk management exercise. This shift can be supported by training and development, or by recruiting those who bring a sustainable mindset and skill set.

Authors

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Operations & Supply Chain Officers Practice. He is based in Dallas.
Kurt Harrison co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Sustainability Practice. He is based in New York.
Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers Practice in the Americas. He is based in Toronto.
Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers Practice in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.
Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers Practice in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.
Mika Nurminen leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers Knowledge team. He is based in Toronto.
Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.

Footnotes

1 Accenture. November 16, 2023. Only a Fifth of Companies on Track for Net Zero, with Heavy Industry Key to Breaking Decarbonization Stalemate, Accenture Reports Find. https://newsroom.accenture.com/news/2023/only-a-fifth-of-companies-on-track-for-net-zero-with-heavy-industry-key-to-breaking-decarbonization-stalemate-accenture-reports-find
2 Boston Consulting Group and HSBC. October 27, 2021. Delivering Net Zero Supply Chains: The Multi-Trillion Dollar Key to Beate Climate Change. https://www.hsbc.com/news-and-views/views/hsbc-views/seven-steps-to-tackle-a-usd50-trillion-challenge
3 Sean Ashcroft. March 16, 2022. Dell supply chief Kevin Brown has sustainability in sights. Supply Chain Digital. https://supplychaindigital.com/sustainability/dell-supply-chief-kevin-brown-has-sustainability-in-sights
4 Boston Consulting Group. January 11, 2023. To Reach Sustainability Goals, Organizations Must Address Critical Sustainability Skills Gap. https://www.bcg.com/press/11january2023-organizations-must-address-critical-sustainability-skills-gap

Moving from Ambition to Action: Sustainable Operations and Supply Chains

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices