Walking the Governance Tightrope | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Walking the Governance Tightrope

Next Generation BoardsLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

Euan Kenworthy

December 31, 2023

4 min

Next Generation BoardsLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Adapt to changing governance trends: skepticism about boards, CEO scrutiny, and maturing ESG programs.

Close

Euan Kenworthy

Singapore

Companies have to evolve and adapt to the changing business environment. In a world shaped by digital disruption and tightening regulation on sustainability disclosures, board leaders would do well to understand the emerging trends in corporate governance to get their balancing act right.

The thing about corporate governance is that it is hardly static. Just like business, the landscape constantly evolves to meet changing demands and societal expectations.

Effective boards understand this dynamic: they appreciate what trends are at the forefront. This gives them the ability to navigate as well as adapt their practices effectively, so as not to be caught off-guard when these trends reshape the operating environment.

Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Governance Trends 2023 reveals three key trends:

1. Scepticism about board quality.
2. CEOs in the crosshairs.
3. Maturation of ESG programmes and disclosures.

Trend #1: Scepticism about board quality

With more savvy and empowered stakeholders paying close attention to many aspects of board performance, boards everywhere will experience further scrutiny of their quality, effectiveness and composition. Merely meeting the formal requirements may not be enough to earn credit and trust from stakeholders. Regulators will also introduce more formal requirements to raise the bar.

The US, for example, is entering a new universal proxy era that will invite a more assertive approach by shareholders on director qualifications and disclosure. These heightened demands for proof of board effectiveness will add momentum to existing efforts to make board evaluation processes more rigorous.

In Europe, companies continue to face demand for upgrades to board skills and structure – such as the requirement for listed German companies to have two financial experts on their boards, as well as the explicit code recommendation for the skills profile to include sustainability expertise relevant to the enterprise.

In Singapore, since the 2018 revision to its Code of Corporate Governance, the limit of nine years for independent directors was tightened by requiring a two-tier shareholder votes to reappoint long-serving independent directors in the Singapore Exchange’s listing rules. When this was not working well, the two-tier shareholder vote was removed and nine years became a firm limit.

Regulators and investors will continue to seek more deliberate board effectiveness activities, particularly related to board refreshment and succession planning. C-suite experience is highly desired, but investors will care more about understanding the link between board skills and long-term strategy.

As a result, more companies will formalise their board search procedures via new nomination committees or enhancements to the people committee, ensuring diversity is part of the process. The box, “Highly Effective Boards”, explores a common set of behaviours that drives effectiveness.

Trend #2: CEOs in the crosshairs

The current global economic distress and turbulent markets are affecting the governance landscape. Everything from the war in Ukraine, post-Covid supply chains and rising inflation have put strain and stress on companies and their leadership, and experts expect an even greater emphasis on board oversight of CEO performance and succession planning across geographies.

Given the focus on CEO performance, it is unsurprising that there have been even greater attention on, and scepticism of, executive compensation. The perception is that boards have been too generous with CEOs – and too willing to explain away missed incentive compensation targets.

Looking ahead, companies should not expect the same benefit of the doubt that some investors were willing to give through the worst days of the pandemic. Investors will expect executives to share the pain they feel as investment returns diminish. Outsized pay-outs will likely generate meaningful scrutiny, more engagement requests, lower say-on-pay support and votes against director nominees.

In Singapore, disclosures of CEO and director remuneration will be mandatory for listed boards’ annual reports for fiscal years ending on or after 31 December 2024. Besides disclosing the policy and criteria for setting remuneration, companies will also be required to provide the amounts and breakdown of the remuneration of each director and the CEO on a named basis.

The harsher spotlight on executive performance and compensation is due to the rise of CEOs as public figures and their growing list of corporate responsibilities. Increasingly, there is an expectation that the CEO takes on the role of a visionary leader and the public face of the organisation. The age of the celebrity CEO (think Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk) with big visions and big personalities is now upon us.

Today’s CEOs are accountable for more, and they control less than ever before. For example, they must deliver outstanding business results in the face of unprecedented external forces, and they must show progress toward sustainability despite often inheriting unsustainable business processes. The box, “The Imperfect CEO” addresses some of these conflicting dilemmas.

Trend #3: Maturation of ESG programmes and disclosures

Despite evidence of some pushback against the environmental, social and governance (ESG) agenda, global investors are doubling down on demands for enhanced sustainability reporting and environmental responsibility activities. Most notably, the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive will disrupt the ESG landscape across the EU by harmonising standards and shaping the reporting environment for years to come.

The aperture on ESG issues continues to broaden as a growing number of stakeholders demand sustainability and corporate social responsibility assurances. Activism is set to increase as social and geopolitical uncertainty continue to rise, coupled with inflationary pressures across the globe. The narrative of some activist investors is increasingly convergent with the broader ESG movement, and they are holding boards and executives accountable by publishing metrics and progress.

While specific expectations vary, institutional investors expect all boards to have thoughtful oversight processes for material ESG risks and opportunities, and boards should expect regular ESG engagement from their investors. These institutional investors are increasingly asking for the full board to be educated and conversant on ESG at a high level, with priority placed on ESG expertise for material issues. Investors will be most focused on structured board oversight, transparency of reporting, progress on material ESG issues, and specific sustainability-related topics, such as carbon reduction.

As companies increasingly rely on digital infrastructure, boards are confronting existential issues concerning their data governance, privacy and cyber security practices. The increasing prevalence of cybersecurity incidents, including those targeting large public companies, continues to spotlight the need for boards to effectively oversee cybersecurity issues and take steps to sufficiently educate directors on the subject matter.

In recent years, investors have been clear that sustainability and climate risk are the board’s responsibility. Rather than having a sole ESG director or sustainability director, expectations are increasing for the entire board to bring a minimum level of sustainability awareness, if not expertise, to their work, using it to identify both risks and new opportunities for value creation. The box, “From Insights to Action”, show the responses of 1,000 companies to the expertise on the board for sustainability.

This article is first published in the SID Directors bulletin 2023 Q4.

Walking the Governance Tightrope

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices