What Are The Top Surprises New CEOs Experience? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Are The Top Surprises New CEOs Experience?

What Are The Top Surprises New CEOs Experience?

ORDER THE NEW CEO BOOK

scroll

No one is ever completely ready to become CEO
—even if they’ve spent weeks, months, or years preparing for the role.

- Ramon Laguarta, CEO of PepsiCo

As a new CEO, you will face many challenges when you move into the top seat.Some are expected.Some will come as a huge surprise. ‍
Here’s what catches many new CEOs unaware.

Typically, surprises fall into two categories:

Outward factors‍those that relate to the company or situation they’re operating in.
and
Inward factors‍those that relate to the actions and reactions of the CEO.

So, what are the top four surprises new CEOs experience?

63%

of new CEOs are negatively surprised by the true state of the business.

Surprise #1 | Inward factor

Even with strong due diligence, it’s often incredibly hard to get a read on the operational and financial state of the business before you start.  It’s common for CEOs to realize that things ‘aren’t exactly as they were written on the can.’
Source: CEO Transitions: Defining Success in the First 12 Months

43%

of new CEOs are surprised at the extent of required board interaction.

Surprise #2 | Outward factor

CEOs found they were spending more time, attention, and energy on the board than they had expected.For some, the time spent on board-related activities was so significant that it affected the CEO’s plan of how they would allocate their time.

40%

of externally hired CEOs are surprised about the reality of the culture.

Surprise #3 | Outward factor

CEOs are often disappointed, and sometimes shocked, once they get into the business and experience it first-hand. Often the culture can be very different from how it was described.
Source: CEO Transitions: Defining Success in the First 12 Months

36%

of CEOs are surprised at the emotional weight of the role.

Surprise #4 | Inward factor

Most CEOs expect that they’ll be responsible for the organization and its people. But the magnitude of the role is still a surprise when it becomes a reality.

Source: CEO Transitions: Defining Success in the First 12 Months

Remember, you can’t know the unknowns.

But, how well and how quickly you understand, accept, and confront these four surprises will have a lot to do with your success—or failure—as a new CEO.

13
Discover more about how new CEOs can nail their first 12-18 months in our latest book, authored by Ty Wiggins, RRA Leadership Advisor, including how to:
Balance listening and action.

Burst the CEO bubble.

Get your messaging right.

Move quickly on your team.

Effectively engage the board and investors.

Evolve your culture.

ORDER YOUR COPY TODAY

How we support CEO transitions

Your odds for success as a new CEO can be significantly improved with a comprehensive CEO transition advisory program.

We help you navigate your first year in role, so you start well and perform quickly—minus the common mistakes.

Learn more

Praise for The New CEO

A must-read, packed with real-world wisdom from leading CEOs and backed by in-depth research. This isn’t just another leadership book; it’s a lifeline for new CEOs, offering concrete strategies for a successful start. From setting priorities and dealing with crisis to building your team and engaging your board—this book covers it. A great gift for any new CEO.”

Hubert Joly
Former Best Buy CEO, senior lecturer Harvard Business School, and Author, The Heart of Business

In a fast-moving world, having a practical, pragmatic, and purposeful approach for stepping into the CEO role is more important than ever. In The New CEO, Ty provides just the right blend of strategic and tactical counsel to accelerate your CEO transition for sustainable success. A must-read for seasoned and next-generation CEOs.”

Alex Gorsky
Board member of Apple and IBM, and former Chairman and CEO of Johnson & Johnson

Ty Wiggins has made it his career to help new CEOs deliver a strong start. He distills his rich experience in this trusted step-by-step guide that will help you tackle the issues you face during your transition. This is a critical book for all new CEOs—and those who work with them—and it could not have come at a more important time.”

Nancy McKinstry
CEO and Chairman of the Executive Board, Wolters Kluwer

Having Ty as my advisor was one of the most valuable assets I had in navigating my first year as a CEO. Now even more leaders can benefit from his expertise. Every new CEO faces different challenges—but the advice, anecdotes, and research in this book will help any new corporate leader lay the groundwork for their long-term success.”

Katie Koch
President and CEO, The TCW Group

For all the attention on new CEOs, there is little objective guidance on how to nail your first 12 months in office. The New CEO offers a clear path forward. Blending in-depth research and powerful stories, Ty offers a critical guide on how to win as a new CEO— and deliver standout results for you and your organization.”

Oscar Munoz
Board member of Salesforce, former CEO and Chairman of United Airlines, and Author, Turnaround Time

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Speak to a consultant

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices