Procurement for the Future: Understanding the Evolving Procurement Landscape | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Procurement for the Future: Understanding the Evolving Procurement Landscape

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceTransformation and InnovationSuccessionConsumerFinancial ServicesIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 1 author

July 29, 2024

8 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceTransformation and InnovationSuccessionConsumerFinancial ServicesIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Are you facing challenges in procurement transformation? Our research uncovers actions firms should prioritize to stay competitive.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

In recent years, the procurement landscape has weathered disruptions, economic shifts, and megatrends such as climate change and technological advancements, including the ongoing and ever-evolving AI revolution. Consequently, procurement requirements and priorities have changed, raising its significance as a strategic function.

However, many chief procurement officers (CPOs) are still facing significant challenges when it comes to leading their functions through the necessary transformations required to thrive in today's environment. To help organizations empower their procurement functions and those who lead them, we sought to understand how the procurement landscape is evolving, the leadership characteristics of those at the helm, and the human capital-related actions organizations should prioritize to stay competitive, finding that:

Procurement priorities have shifted significantly in recent years, with sustainability and digital transformations now topping the list.

Most procurement functions are still in the early days of their transformation journey.

While the majority of CPOs have held their roles amidst the significant disruptions of the past four years, Hogan personality data shows that most procurement leaders appear well-equipped to weather this continued uncertainty.

The evolving priorities of procurement

Procurement priorities have clearly changed in recent years. In Deloitte's CPO survey in 2018, the top three priorities were reducing costs, new product/market development, and managing risks. By 2023, those top priorities had shifted to driving operational efficiency, enhancing ESG/CSR, and digital transformation. Interestingly, two significant transformations—ESG/CSR (ranked 6th in 2018) and digital (not listed as a priority in 2018)—have emerged as top priorities within the last five years.1 2

The role of procurement has definitely evolved in recent years. A few years ago, procurement was mainly about price and savings. Nowadays you are more strategically involved, more about agility and resilience… The question becomes how to bring innovation from your partners to Unilever and vice versa. It requires much closer collaboration with the partners, but also internally...”3

Willen Uijen
Chief Procurement Officer at Unilever

These shifting priorities are having varied impacts on CPOs, and this is dependent on their specific responsibilities. A CPO can manage indirect procurement, direct procurement, or both, and the scope and strategic nature of the role can vary notably across industries and firms. And these remits often define who the CPO reports to, as these real-life examples exemplify:

CPOs that manage a larger indirect spend for companies that don’t “make” something will typically report to the CFO. However, if the company makes products or components, and procurement supports a large network of facilities, the CPO typically reports to a COO or CEO. Furthermore, our search and assessment work shows that CPOs reporting to the COO or CEO tend to be more strategic and value-based.

Hence, it is essential to benchmark procurement functions against comparable organizations when assessing priorities and related strategies.

Addressing talent challenges in procurement's transformation journey

While best-in-class procurement functions appear well-positioned to weather the changing environment, the majority are early in their transformations – in the “basic order taking” or “functionally advanced” stages (Figure 1). In these stages, digital tools may automate certain basic reporting tasks, but most processes still rely on manual efforts. As a result, for the majority of procurement departments, priorities like digital and AI transformation represent substantial undertakings. Furthermore, the gap between leaders and laggards in this regard is widening rapidly.

Figure 1: The maturity of procurement organizations – five archetypes

Source: Delaney, Mary, et al. Using M&A to transform procurement. McKinsey. March 1, 2023.

Yet, for many of these early-stage organizations, transformation is a significant challenge, with persistence of barriers like scarcity of talent and skills across organizational levels. A survey conducted by BCG among C-suite and board-level executives found that 39% of respondents identified difficulties in attracting, developing, and retaining skills as one of the top five barriers to changing procurement.4 This survey was conducted before the AI revolution gained momentum, which has further exacerbated the knowledge and skills gaps.

Insights from Hogan psychometric analysis: Five common CPO characteristics

The role of the CPO is vital for driving successful transformation within the procurement function. To gain a better understanding of these versatile leaders and their potential strengths and weaknesses in confronting the above challenges and opportunities, we analyzed the demographic data of 77 CPOs and examined personality traits and values through Hogan psychometric test scores of 122 procurement leaders.

Interestingly, around 60% of CPOs were in the role for the first time (Figure 2). Furthermore, around 58% of these first-time CPOs have been in the position for less than four years. Thus, a significant proportion of CPOs only held the role amidst significant disruptions and prolonged challenges. These are factors to consider when assessing coaching and development opportunities.

Figure 2: CPO demographics

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis, N = 77 CPOs, May 2024

However, our research shows that most CPOs have personalities that are well-equipped to weather this continued uncertainty.

Through our analysis of Hogan data, we discovered five common characteristics among the CPO population, despite variations in the nature and complexity of their roles. These characteristics include high adaptability and optimism, a results-focused mindset, drive and determination, diplomatic and trust-building abilities, as well as a supportive and team-oriented approach (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Five common CPO characteristics

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of Hogan psychometric data, N = 122 CPOs

Considering the imperative for collaboration and adaptability in the current business environment, CPOs appear to possess many personality traits and values that can be seen as strengths. Additionally, CPO’s supportive and team oriented approach can be beneficial in retaining, attracting and further upskilling talent – all critical activities for procurement functions in their transformation journey.

Deep Dive: Exploring the similarities between CPOs and COOs

Given the heightened strategic significance of the CPO role, we also wanted to understand how they compare to COOs, who often hold the highest-ranking position in operations and supply chain.

Interestingly, we found only a few notable differences between the two leader cohorts. In fact, on a global level, COOs and CPOs have more in common than COOs based in North America compared to those in Europe. We discovered that it tends to be more challenging for CPOs to trust others in pressure situations than for COOs. Additionally, COOs tend to prefer working environments that are productive and follow a no-nonsense mentality while CPOs tend to place a premium on a “work hard, play hard” mentality.

While skills and competencies may need to be developed and complemented through the right team, the findings suggest that CPOs possess personality traits and values that make transitioning to a COO role a viable career path. As organizations consider the future of their procurement teams and leaders, these learnings highlight both a potential career path and new development considerations, including cultivating the ability to trust others in pressure situations, harnessing the power of teams, and moderating the "play hard" mentality.

Unlocking procurement excellence: Prioritizing CPO development, talent focus, and career advancement

CPOs that effectively navigate the changing environment can play a critical role in differentiating their company against competition. These functions have a significant impact on top- and bottom-line growth, with procurement spend typically accounting for 30% of revenue for service firms and at least 50% of revenue for manufacturing companies.5 Furthermore, procurement plays a crucial role in establishing contracts and policies with numerous suppliers that form the supply chain, ultimately exerting a significant influence on sustainability impact.

To effectively navigate the evolving priorities and advance the maturity of procurement, hiring teams should prioritize their CPO’s personal development, as well as talent acquisition, retention, and upskilling across procurement teams. Furthermore, the current situation presents unique career advancement opportunities for CPOs to seize.

Prioritize development opportunities for CPOs: Given the significant influence of procurement on the firm’s overall performance, ensure your CPOs receive the necessary training and development. The success in procurement transformation requires leaders who can make educated strategic decisions and investments. Our previous research has identified potential skills gaps in priority areas such as AI and sustainability. Moreover, many CPOs are relatively new to their roles and have been grappling with disruption and change. These leaders could benefit from coaching and mentoring provided by seasoned procurement leaders.

Focus on talent across teams: The evolving landscape of procurement demands new skills and capabilities that can be challenging to acquire. Additionally, losing existing talent is a material risk. Therefore, prioritize talent acquisition, retention, and upskilling across the entire function. Procurement functions that effectively execute these initiatives will be better equipped to excel and outperform their competitors. After all, procurement spend is a significant proportion of total revenue.

Present future opportunities: The increasing strategic importance of procurement presents an excellent opportunity for CPOs to secure a real seat at the decision-making table and advance their own careers. Our analysis shows that CPOs exhibit competitiveness and a strategic mindset regarding their professional growth. Encourage CPOs to seize these opportunities and consider them in COO succession plans.

By prioritizing the above initiatives, organizations can position their procurement functions for success. This not only enhances the effectiveness of procurement but also contributes to the overall success of the organization. Advances in procurement can well be the company’s biggest opportunity to transform business performance.

Authors

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Dallas.
Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in the Americas. He is based in Toronto.
Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.
Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.
Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.

References

1 Younger, Lance, et al. Deloitte’s Chief Procurement Officer survey in 2018. Deloitte. 2018

2 Addicoat, Aaron, et al. 2023 Global Chief Procurement Officer (CPO) Survey. Deloitte. 2023

3 Van Leemput, Angelo. Willem Uijen (Unilever): we pursue procurement with purpose. Management Scope. August 29, 2023

4 Garg, Mudit et al. Seven Forces Reshaping Procurement. BCG. May 17, 2023

5 Hales, Mike et al. Realizing the power of procurement. Kearney. January 14, 2020

Procurement for the Future: Understanding the Evolving Procurement Landscape

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices