The Nominating and Governance Committee Chair Has the Most Precarious Seat on the Board | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Nominating and Governance Committee Chair Has the Most Precarious Seat on the Board

InclusionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard Composition and SuccessionCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

June 28, 2024

5 min

InclusionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard Composition and SuccessionCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

As investor support for NomGov chairs declines, boards should monitor evolving expectations.

Close

Rich Fields

Boston

Amy Sampson

Boston

Reprinted with permission from the National Association of Corporate Directors after originally appearing as a Directorship online article on June 25, 2024.

The average level of investor support for the election of Russell 3000 nominating and governance committee chairs fell below 90 percent for the first time in 2023, according to The Conference Board. Additionally, the average support for nominating and governance committee chairs (88.6%) was significantly lower than the median level of support for directors overall (97%) in 2023. More than 100 nominating and governance committee chairs faced dramatic protest votes in 2023: 94 (5.5%) saw support below 70 percent and 14 (0.8%) failed to receive majority support.

These meaningful shifts reflect a troubling reality for many companies: investors are becoming more comfortable withholding support from directors for supposed governance failures and nominating and governance committee chairs are a common target for a number of reasons, many of which we have catalogued in our NomGov Chair Vulnerability Tracker.

It is critical that boards pay attention to what’s driving this weakened support and get ahead of evolving investor focus areas.

A Growing List of Reasons Shareholders May Withhold Support

In the past, many investors would only vote against nominating and governance committee chairs for fundamental structural governance issues, such as amending governance documents that may promote board entrenchment or adopting a poison pill without shareholder approval.

Things have changed. Diversity was not a focus area even in the relatively recent past. For example, BlackRock’s 2014 proxy voting guidelines do not even mention the words “diversity” or “gender.” In the past few years, guidelines evolved to have statements supporting diversity but lacking a commitment to vote against nondiverse boards. Today, several major investors, including BlackRock, Vanguard, and State Street Global Advisors, and proxy advisors Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) and Glass, Lewis & Co., have set explicit expectations for minimum levels of gender diversity that vary by market and index.

Racial and ethnic diversity standards have also become more common. ISS’s Proxy Voting Guidelines recommend to vote against the nominating and governance committee chair at Russell 3000 companies if the board “has no apparent racially or ethnically diverse members.” Wellington Management Co. adopted a similar policy in its 2023 Proxy Voting Guidelines for large-cap US companies that have no minority ethnic representation and no “compelling reason for being unable to.”

Investors and proxy advisors are also much more attentive to board refreshment. The board’s average tenure rarely leads to votes against by most significant US institutional investors. The most common exception is when a board appears to be unable to add new members. For example, Glass Lewis’s 2024 Glass Lewis Proxy Voting Policies state that it may recommend withholding support for nominating and governance committee chairs if “the average tenure of nonexecutive directors is 10 years or more and no new independent directors have joined the board in the past five years.”

Three Areas Generating More Investor Engagement

Voting is one of many important and highly visible mechanisms investors use to signal their preferences to companies, but it is not the only one. Most investors have priorities for direct engagement with companies, and these engagement priorities frequently signal potential changes to voting guidelines. Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Corporate Governance Trends for 2024 report identified three topics that generate numerous engagement requests with companies—and may lead to more voting action.

Board composition. Investors ultimately recognize that their investments are more likely to yield sufficient returns if a company’s board has the right people around the table. While some investors already vote against director election due to a lack of diversity or a demonstrated lack of refreshment, they are also asking questions about other elements of board composition, including tenure, diversity of experience, and recency of experience. In short, they want companies to say, and potentially do, more to ensure that the members of the board have the backgrounds, skills, and experiences that will help the company succeed today and in the future. Expect more questions from investors on this front and increasing pressure for more descriptive and rigorous composition matrices and explanations of the board’s philosophy for refreshment.

Board evaluations. Concern about board composition has led more investors to ask questions about boards’ evaluation practices, including who leads the processes, whether interviews are used, and what topics are addressed during the evaluations. Internally facilitated, survey-based processes are perceived as ineffective at many companies, especially at supporting board refreshment. A growing number of investors prefer independently led, interview-based processes that gather feedback at the board, committee, and individual director levels. Individual feedback and attention to board composition are especially important to investors, as many are not confident that boards will effectively self-manage. According to PwC, 58 percent of investors don’t trust the boards of companies they invest in to remove underperforming directors.

Oversight of CEO succession planning. CEO turnover is at historically high levels. Data from Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global CEO Turnover Index show that in the first quarter of 2024, 68 CEOs were appointed and 52 CEOs departed the role across the major global indices, the highest quarter one totals since 2018 and 2020, respectively. The number of top executives who fail to reach two years of tenure is particularly troubling, which may suggest a failure in oversight of the CEO succession planning process. Those failures are enormously costly for companies, which is why several major investors are more directly asking about board oversight of CEO succession planning. Expect this to continue and watch for future policies that may demand more disclosure regarding the allocation of CEO succession oversight across the board and its committees.

Navigating This New Normal

Like it or not, nominating and governance committee chairs are, and will remain, in the spotlight. As attention to governance topics grows, so too will demands on nominating and governance committees and their leaders. We suggest that those leaders do two things: stay current on evolving stakeholder expectations and recognize that going beyond what is legally required—and sharing appropriate details with investors—may be the most effective defense against future trouble.

Russell Reynolds Associates is a NACD strategic content partner, providing directors with critical and timely information, and perspectives. Russell Reynolds Associates is a financial supporter of the NACD.

Authors

Richard Fields is the global leader of the Board Effectiveness Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates.
Amy Sampson is a leader within the Americas Board Effectiveness Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices