Still Think the Metaverse is a Buzzword? Five Myths About Leadership and the Next Tech Leap | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Still Think the Metaverse is a Buzzword? Five Myths About Leadership and the Next Tech Leap

Technology and InnovationTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

Tristan Jervis

March 31, 2023

6 min

Technology and InnovationTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

We debunk five myths about how businesses are preparing for the metaverse, and share tips for leaders to avoid falling behind.

Close

Tristan Jervis

London

Web3.0, including metaverse experiences, will eventually replace the internet experience that we know today. This technology will seamlessly combine our physical and digital lives in one space. While the metaverse continues to be defined, its disruptive potential is impossible to ignore.

We surveyed nearly 230 CEOs about their thoughts on Web 3.0 and metaverse technologies—and the actions their organizations have taken to date. This research identified five common myths about what strategic actions companies are taking to prepare for the metaverse, and how they are preparing their leadership teams and workforces for what is ahead.

Five Misconceptions About Leadership in the Next Tech LeapMyth 1
This is all talk—most companies aren’t taking much action

Myth 2
Only consumer tech companies need to care about the metaverse

Myth 3
Chief metaverse officers are just for hype

Myth 4
Technology experts are the only leaders involved in setting the metaverse strategies

Myth 5
The race to the metaverse is among start-ups

Myth 1: This is all talk—most companies aren’t taking much action
If your leadership team hasn’t discussed the next leap forward in tech, you’re very likely behind your competitors. Although over 80% of companies have had discussions about the metaverses’ impact on their business, nearly 50% of companies are already taking strategic action towards preparing for the metaverse. Only one-third say they’re not getting in the game yet.

Taking strategic action

Taking a few ad hoc actions

No actions taken

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor Pulse, October 2022, n=229 CEOs

Myth 2: Only consumer tech companies need to care about the metaverse
Among those taking strategic actions towards preparing their businesses for the metaverse, industrial and natural resources companies (mostly B2B) are in the lead, and significantly higher compared to most other industries.
% of leaders citing their organization taking strategic action about the metaverse
0
%

of industrial and natural resource companies

0
%

of technology companies

0
%

of consumer companies

0
%

of business/ professional services firms

0
%

of healthcare companies

0
%

of financial services companies

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor Pulse, October 2022, n=229 CEOs

These strategic industrial and natural resource companies are not producing video games and glasses; rather, they’re innovating on city planning, car manufacturing, and simulating how supply chains can operate with sustainability at their cores. Technology and consumer companies, the more obvious choices, are also paying strategic attention to preparing for the metaverse.
The most common strategic actions taken across industries include:
Discussions with the board about strategic plans (70%)
Discussions about new roles and changes to the organization’s structure (54%)
Discussions around prioritized competencies and skills (50%)
Driving internal skills training and development (45%)
Increased investment in R&D (47%)
Launched new revenue generating business unit/service (41%)

Myth 3: Chief metaverse officers are just for hype
Our research shows that chief metaverse officers are not one-size-fits-all; in fact, we found that their remits can vary dramatically based on their industry, strategic positioning, innovation pipeline, where they are on the growth curve, and/or the marketing approach at their time of appointment.

Expanding tech officer mandate
Expanding the mandate of existing technology leaders is the top leadership shift made so far

New specialist roles
Newly, highly specialized roles are emerging, creating a bench of talent that can grow into metaverse leadership

Chief metaverse officer
Only a few have appointed a dedicated metaverse leader by name

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor Pulse, October 2022, n=229 CEOs
Only 7% of leaders we surveyed said they have a formal chief metaverse officer today. Instead, most companies (41%) are expanding the mandate of their current technology leaders to wrap around this space or creating new specialist roles at levels below the C-suite (35%) to form a talent bench who can grow into metaverse C-suite leaders when the time is right.  At one point, every early emerging technology and technology leadership position felt like hype too (think chief information officers of the early 1990s and chief digital officers in the 2010s). But these essential innovations and roles came to be standard in every large company today, both for their deep expertise and for keeping up with technology innovation. Technology is dynamic—technology leaders must be as well.

Myth 4: Technology experts are the only leaders involved in setting the metaverse strategies

The technicalities of the structural components that underpin what will eventually become the metaverse are extremely complex. Our current level of innovation only skims the surface of the systems and hardware that will eventually power this space. That said, having a highly-skilled technology leader to drive this to market is a must and they must have a combination of technical expertise, business acumen, and a diplomatic disposition, because they can’t make the metaverse happen alone.

As Web3.0 demands new acumen from technology leaders, company leaders must recognize that their current technologists are key to these innovations and must be close to core leadership.

Companies taking strategic approaches to metaverse innovation today are mostly leaning on their technology leaders and expanding their roles to include what is needed to stay competitive in this race. But those technology leaders must work closely with the R&D and innovation leaders, as well as digital and data leaders who are highly involved at these companies. Strategy, operations and supply chain, finance, human resources, marketing and e-commerce leaders are also playing a major role in shaping their functions to be ready for what is to come – but will lean on technology leaders to understand what is needed to get there.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor Pulse, October 2022, n=145 CEOs.

In creating the metaverse, the balance between guidance and autonomy is key. We learned from leaders currently working in this space that ideating and innovating around the metaverse with the entire C-suite team, as well as at the function and divisional leadership levels, is crucial for garnering buy-in for what can appear like a nebulous agenda, that’s also operating on a much slower development cycle than most are accustomed to.

Myth 5: The race to the metaverse is among start-ups

Among companies taking strategic actions, just as many are publicly traded (22%) as those backed by private capital and venture funding. Another 31% of these companies are privately held.

Be on the lookout for metaverse M&A activity, as larger public companies seek to advance their positions by acquiring the strong growth companies that were first out of the gate. In fact, 42% of large public companies say that they have already increased their M&A activity in this space (compared to just 26% of companies of all ownership types).

How can RRA help?

We partner with you through the evolution of your metaverse leadership strategy

Executive Search: Find CEOs, C-suite, and board leaders who have the vision and the acumen to drive growth with the new technologies

Growth and Scaling: Build the most effective leadership team to scale your company through the growth curve, whether you’re a private capital-backed metaverse pure-play business or large public enterprise with a portfolio of new technology-driven acquisitions

Novel Leadership Roles: Plan for your first chief metaverse officer and guide you through models for embedding this novel C-suite position into your organization

Preparing Technology’s Next Generation to Lead: As the role of technology leaders evolves, we work with you to ensure your next generation of technology talent have the behavioral competencies needed to set the future agenda

Leadership Assessment and Development: Assess the technology acumen of every leader in your business to bring all leaders onto the same page, while developing their abilities to inspire peers and employees to believe in the long-term technology agenda of your business

Culture Advisory: Align culture changes with the evolution of your technology strategy to foster faster innovation

Return to main page

Authors

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
Jemi Crookes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Knowledge team. She is based in Washington, D.C.
George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers capability globally. He is based in London.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices