How to Structure an Effective Pre-IPO Board in the UK | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How to Structure an Effective Pre-IPO Board in the UK

Portfolio Company LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

+ 5 authors

November 22, 2022

7 min

Portfolio Company LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

Here, we identify the key components for delivering a successful, timely and value enhancing board for IPO.

Close

Helen Metcalfe

London

Laura Sanderson

London

Emily Taylor

New York
London

Emma Combe

London

Julia Budd

London

Rhys Grossman

London

Luke Meynell

London

Agnes Greaves

London

Read the study in full here

Preparing for an IPO is a challenge. Getting a well-constructed and value-enhancing board in place requires thought and planning. The markets remain challenging for companies working towards IPO - now may be a good time for those businesses to get ahead of the game and start addressing their board requirements.

Russell Reynolds Associates has an extensive track record in supporting and advising on building boards for IPO, including helping private capital firms prepare portfolio companies for listing on indices around the world. In the first of a Russell Reynolds’ thought leadership series on building pre-IPO boards, we focus our attention on the UK, drawing on our experience and analysis of recently listed boards to identify the key components of building a successful board:

Creating value with the right board

Balancing listing rules, corporate governance best practices and the commercial and strategic needs of the business to create a well-composed board that will enhance value at IPO and guide the organisation to sustained success as a listed business.

Navigating the UK’s “comply or explain” approach to corporate governance and demonstrating a pathway to best practice.

Managing the board build

The role of advisors in planning the build, establishing alignment amongst stakeholders and maintaining pace.

Prioritising keystone roles, understanding the technical experience requirements.

Securing the highest quality board directors and engaging them effectively.

Setting expectations: ambition and pragmatism

The appeal of pre-IPO boards for candidates, and the shifting approach to pre-IPO compensation.

Balancing the ambitions of owners for high profile, value enhancing board members with the longer term needs of the listed entity.

Completing the puzzle

As with a jigsaw puzzle, the complexity and the time taken to assemble the right board will depend on the number of pieces in play. The greater the clarity on the overall picture and the component parts, the easier it will be to assemble. Time taken to prepare, understand the process and timing, align expectations, debate the priorities and define key appointments, and establish stakeholder engagement and communication is time well spent. Balancing the intermediary steps while keeping sight of the longer term requirements and the bigger picture requires effort. The resulting well-constructed board will support the IPO equity story and be a critical factor in the success of a newly public company.

Read the study in full here

Click here

Authors

Helen Metcalfe is a senior member of the firm’s board & CEO Advisory Partners, specialising in chair, chief executive and non-executive director appointments and board advisory work.

Emily Taylor co-leads the global Private Equity Practice for Russell Reynolds Associates, working closely with investment teams, advising on chair and board appointments.

Laura Sanderson leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ operations in the UK and oversees the firm’s board & CEO Advisory Partners team throughout Europe.

Julia Budd is a senior member of the firm’s board & CEO Advisory Partners, specialising in chair, CEO and non-executive director searches, as well as board succession planning. Julia advises clients across industries, from FTSE 100 boards to smaller companies which are, or are poised to become, leaders in their own markets.

Rhys Grossman co-leads the Consumer Sector and Consumer Digital & Media Practice for Russell Reynolds Associates, working closely with publicly listed, private equity and venture capital firms to recruit transformative leaders who understand the confluence of technology and business to spur future growth.

Luke Meynell co-leads the firm’s board & CEO Advisory Partners, as well as leading the practice in the UK. He specializes in working with FTSE clients or equivalent organizations to deliver complex chief executive and chair succession projects, as well as other key board appointments, such as non-executive director or CFO roles. Luke is based in London.

Agnes Greaves co-leads the firm’s Core & Growth Technology practice globally and the Consumer Digital & Media practice in Europe. She focuses on board and senior management appointments, advising both established market leaders and investor-backed clients on optimal organisational design and how to attract and retain high-impact and transformative leaders.

Emma Combe is a member of the firm’s board & CEO Advisory Partners Sector. Based in London, Emma excels at identifying board chairs, CEOs, and executive and non-executive directors for listed, private equity and family-owned businesses.

Emily O’Shea specialises in chair, CEO and non-executive director appointments across a range of industries with a particular focus on healthcare, life sciences and organizations underpinned by innovation and R&D.

Additional Authors

Asaf Rubin, London

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices