C-suite Performance: Are You Thinking About Your Top Team in the Right Way? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

C-suite Performance: Are You Thinking About Your Top Team in the Right Way?

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipAssessment and BenchmarkingTeam PerformanceExecutive Search

Article

September 01, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipAssessment and BenchmarkingTeam PerformanceExecutive Search

Executive Summary

We set out the four myths that hold CEOs back from building supercharged C-suites—and how to move forward to deliver stand-out performance.

Close

Jim Hinds

London

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

Back to Enabling C-suite Success

C-suite performance—both individually and collectively—makes or breaks a business.

When you get it right, C-suites deliver greater shareholder value and ensure you stay one step ahead of a fast-changing world. In fact, our research shows that CEOs who believe they have a high-caliber C-suite say their team scores on average 30% higher on a range of financial and cultural indicators than poor-performing teams. That’s a lot of upside.

42
%

more effective at managing complex initiatives

27
%

better at delivering on strategic priorities

27
%

better at ensuring the organization’s future readiness

Yet too many organizations are not realizing these opportunities. Instead of powering business success, C-suites are dogged by high rates of executive failure and poor team dynamics. Why? The short answer is that the world has changed. But the way organizations think about the C-suite has not changed with it.

We share four outdated myths that are holding CEOs back from building a supercharged C-suite, and how to now move forward to deliver stand-out performance

01. The CEO is the biggest influence on organizational success.

The issues facing organizations are more complex than ever before. What it takes to meet these challenges—and even anticipate them—has become increasingly nuanced.

For years, it was thought that just having the right CEO in place was enough. That led to the rise of “hero CEOs” in corporate folklore—leaders valorized by employees, investors, and the media for their talent for changing companies’ fortunes. Of course, the CEO is still the core player in delivering organizational success (that will never change), but it’s no longer the whole story.

Today’s CEOs are under pressure to navigate emerging threats, future-proof their business model, and continuously secure competitive advantage—all at clashing timescales. It’s becoming a tough job for any one person to do, whether you’re a “hero CEO” or not.

At the same time, the arrival of extraordinary challenges, such as a global pandemic, the sustainability agenda, and geopolitical tensions, have left CEOs in completely new territory. With no playbook to fall back on, CEOs have no choice but to admit that they don’t have all the answers—something that would have been unheard of just a decade ago.

In this new world, the idea of the lone-wolf CEO no longer fits. You need the right people and team around you to help you make high-impact decisions in real time. With this, what it means to be a great C-suite leader has changed. Being a successful CxO now demands a completely different set of skill sets than before. More is expected from each C-suite leader, both in terms of their specific role as well as how they perform as a team.

So, look at your executive team and ask yourself whether it's made up of the right leaders for now and the future, who thrive in ambiguity, challenge the status quo, and understand how to make progress even in times of fast-paced change. Answering this question won’t just be critical to business success, but your success as a CEO, too.

02. You just need stand-out business and functional leaders.

Organizations are moving fast to hire new CxOs who have the right expertise to deal with fast-changing external pressures—from inclusion and sustainability to tech transformation. It’s why so many new roles now jostle on the C-suite (Chief People Officer, Chief Culture Officer, Chief Sustainability Officer, Chief Information Officer…) alongside the traditional mainstays like the Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operations Officer.

The increase in C-suite roles has helped to diversify the expertise and experience of the executive ranks. And that is only a good thing. But it has failed to solve a bigger problem: Emerging challenges do not touch just one function or business line at a time. Solving those problems requires leaders who can work horizontally across the company, not just vertically.

In this time of constant and complex change, the old model of individual leadership is falling short and fueling underperformance—of both the team and the business. CxOs can no longer afford to work in individual siloes, only meeting their own goals and priorities. They also need to understand how to work hand-in-hand with other C-suite leaders, including the CEO, to fuel organizational performance.

Think of it this way: It’s no longer about finding exceptional soloists. You need to think about the whole orchestra. As the CEO, it’s your job to set the tempo, manage the dynamics, and make sure the team works together as one. Leaders must be assessed not only on their individual skills but their ability to enhance the broader C-suite—and fulfill their role as torchbearers of organizational culture.

In addition, leadership is ultimately the single most important lever when it comes to establishing the cultural identity of your organization. Changes from the top trickle down to every part of the business. That’s why it’s so important to make sure you have the right people at the top of the house, role modeling the right behaviors. They need to help your culture take root. They need to own it and embody it in everything they do.

So, next time you are looking to find a stand-out CMO, CDO, CFO, or category/regional leader, remember that you need to think beyond filling individual leadership gaps. That is how you win in today’s landscape. Adopt a more holistic approach to identifying, assessing, and developing your leaders to ensure your entire C-suite syncs and succeeds together, and sets the tone of your entire organization.

This team-wide approach will exponentially increase your company’s ability to face and overcome complex challenges. But getting it right? That can be a challenge in itself.

03. CxOs always need to work in harmony.

Every executive team is made of an inclusive mosaic of personalities, each with their own style, behaviors, and expertise, and each focused on delivering their own set of goals and priorities.

But in the most successful C-suites, everyone pulls in the same direction to deliver against the CEO’s strategy and vision. Executives have respect for each other and are passionate about working together to drive results.

This cohesion does not mean that the team is homogenous in its thinking or unwilling to engage in vigorous debate and disagreement. Effective top teams don’t shy away from tension. Competition and debate are part of the job. But so are support and collaboration. The difference is that high-caliber C-suites know how to productively navigate interpersonal friction. And they know when to pull away and when to knit together.

It takes a special kind of leader to be able to flex their approach like this, including knowing when to disrupt the status quo, and when to be pragmatic about the pace of innovation within their organization. When to take risks and when to show vigilance before steering the organization off a cliff. When to be heroic and when to be vulnerable. And when to galvanize support and when to step back and share credit, promote the success of others, and connect to something greater than themselves.

This ability to span seemingly opposing goals at the same time is one of the key things we look for when assessing a leader’s readiness to move up from a functional leadership role or general management role into the C-suite. Ultimately, being able to flex your leadership style for different situations is what differentiates a good CxO from a great one, particularly in a complex and changing world.

Ultimately, there is no static definition of a good top team. Instead, CEOs must constantly recalibrate team dynamics as organizational priorities and market conditions change. For example, an organization in need of a turnaround may require strong, directive leadership with an emphasis on innovation and short-term wins; others may need exactly the opposite. There is no one right way. Instead of striving for absolute harmony, strive for productive tension. A C-suite that doesn’t shy away from conflict, but instead knows how to harness it for performance.

04. C-suite success should focus on performance today.

Getting the right C-suite team in place, and making sure it has the right leaders and team players, is no mean feat. But your job as CEO does not end there. The C-suite can’t be a set-and-forget process. It’s also important to actively plan for the future and build a deep talent bench of future-ready leaders within your ranks.

There is work to do here. Consider this research, which shows that 62% of global executives believe their organization doesn’t have a successful strategy for C-suite succession. With executive churn on the rise (44% of C-suite leaders told us recently that they would move to another employer for the right opportunity), CEOs who don’t actively plan may find themselves scrambling at every CxO departure.

Future-proofing C-suite teams requires foresight and commitment. You need to get to know your rising stars, understanding their strengths, weaknesses, leadership styles, and the crucible experiences that will unleash their potential. A critical part of this is ensuring they don’t just develop as individuals, but also as team players, understanding how they can successfully harness the strengths of others to make smart decisions. The final piece, and perhaps most important piece, is ensuring they remain engaged and invested in your organization, so they stick around, ready to take over when the time comes.

So, develop that succession strategy for every C-suite role. Look inside and outside your walls for your next-generation leaders. Create clarity around growth opportunities, invest in development, and connect them to your organizational purpose. And don’t forget to tell next-gen leaders they are part of your long-term vision. Only then do you mitigate the risk of vacancies and position your organization for uninterrupted, long-term performance.

In 60 Seconds

The world has changed—and your C-suite must change with it. Your success (and legacy) as a leader depends on your ability to construct and lead a high-performing C-suite at the individual and team levels—for today as well as tomorrow. There is an urgent imperative to build a C-suite that can help you meet complex challenges head-on, which is a multi-faceted challenge.

Look beyond CV credentials. Your next CxO will need much more than the right skills, experiences, and capabilities. They will also need to model the right behaviors to drive team and enterprise-wide culture and performance. Think about the orchestra, not just the soloists. And ensure that leadership is 100% aligned with building and perpetuating the right organizational culture to deliver against the strategic priorities.

Don’t strive for absolute harmony. Every C-suite will experience tensions. The key is to ensure they are productive, bringing the best of the whole team and fueling performance. And don’t forget that team dynamics will need constant development and recalibration.

Prioritize CxO succession strategies. You don’t want to be left scrambling when your next CxO departs. The best succession plans start three to five years out. Find your future stars, invest in their development, and keep them engaged so they are ready to step up when the time comes.

WE WOULD LOVE TO PARTNER WITH YOU

Start developing your C-suite to deliver even greater success
with our experts

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices