Net Zero transition and what it means for business | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Net zero transition and what it means for business

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationLeadershipIndustrialSustainability Officers

Article

December 08, 2022

5 min

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationLeadershipIndustrialSustainability Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We speak to the CEO of Drax Group about why the race to net zero will be a slow one and how he helped Drax to embrace clean energy ambitions.

Close

Chris Nicholson

London

Abigail Skerrett

London

An interview with Will Gardiner

As part of our Energy Matters series, we speak to Will Gardiner, CEO of Drax Group, about why the race to net zero will be a slow one and how he helped Drax to embrace clean energy ambitions.

Are you optimistic about our race to net zero? If so, can you explain why?

I am optimistic, and increasingly so, the people in this race are not just a committed environmental minority but now a wider base of larger corporates globally, which in turn means significant amounts of capital and industrial expertise is being applied to the problem.

We are seeing an energy transition wave gathering speed and seeing big industry move beyond fundamentals like less air travel and improving energy efficiency, to developing solutions for carbon capture, developing our use of hydrogen and ultimately looking at the development of synthetic fuels. The amount of capital and expertise being brought to bear on the carbon problem can only be a positive force.

On the flip side, what do you think could slow our progress to net zero down?

Inevitably, every element of what is required to achieve net zero will take a lot of time.
If we look at the financial markets over the past 20 years, it is fair to say that people have become accustomed to making a lot of money very quickly. In the tech space, we have companies like Google and Facebook that have grown to be massive businesses in a relatively short space of time, in part because they are virtual. When we look at the energy transition process, we do need to build substantial infrastructure and of course that takes time, which must be factored in.

Another aspect of this is that we will have to reallocate hundreds of trillions of dollars’ worth of resources from what they are currently doing to what we need them to do. We will need to move from a fossil fuels investment world to a renewables investment world, and we should not underestimate the size and scale of that challenge.

The third element of this that will take considerable time for every company to install is the regulatory framework and corporate infrastructure required. Companies will need to start to measure and report their carbon impact, which will require measurement tools and all the regulations around how that measurement will happen to be put in place. There is a huge amount of work in verification and validation that needs to be done for people to be confident that those numbers are right.
We must recognize that all of this will take time, and make sure that we do not lose heart or run out of patience as we put these things in place.

Drax under your leadership has been one of the first movers when it comes to energy transition. What advice would you give IOCs and other energy businesses who are looking to transition about adapting the culture of their organization?

I would say they need to design a strategy and develop a business model that will create value while also being aligned with net zero. So, with Drax, when I became CEO, we decided we are going to be a purpose driven company, and our purpose is to enable a zero-carbon, lower cost energy future. Once we had that purpose, we developed a strategy that allowed us to deliver on creating significant value while also fighting the battle against climate change. Then we built the culture and values within our organisation to support the purpose.

Finding a way to deliver value that is consistent with net zero ambitions will not be easy for a lot of companies, but once you have that in place it will become a huge part of the employee value proposition. People want to work for companies that are doing something to make a difference in this space, so having a strategy that aligns value with the fight against climate change will be very powerful.

Back in 2021, it was widely reported that the UK government had asked Drax to turn some of its aging coal plants back on to help deal with energy supply issues. As the CEO of a company aligned to a net zero purpose, how do you justify this kind of conflict with employees and shareholders?

I think businesses are moving away from fossil fuels, but there are certain uses for oil, gas and coal which are still acceptable to many. However, I do think this will change as the climate crisis intensifies and businesses will get to a point when they say, ‘we won’t do that.’

To me, it is about the balance, and I think people do understand that there are situations that necessitate a balance of objectives, such as decarbonising the energy system while ensuring security of supply.

Today, our biomass and hydro operations provide enough reliable, renewable power for 5 million homes while playing a significant role in UK energy security. However, Drax has agreed to the UK government’s request to delay the planned closure of our two remaining coal-fired power generating units until March 2023 to help bolster the UK’s energy security this winter. They will not generate commercially – only if required to do so by the National Grid. Russia’s war on Ukraine means Europe is facing a security of supply crisis this winter. And so, whilst we remain committed to a coal-free future and are focused on deployment of the critical carbon dioxide removal technology bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), we also accept that we must play our part in supporting the UK, and we’re proud to do what we can to help keep the lights on this winter, which is going to be really challenging for so many people. But we’re also planning to invest £2.5bn in deploying innovative renewable energy technologies including BECCS and pumped storage hydro, which will support security of supply, as well as decarbonisation goals, whilst creating thousands of jobs.

We all know how pivotal technology will be in the energy transition process, and you have spoken out about the importance of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) recently. What other technologies and initiatives do you think will have the most significant impact in helping the world to decarbonize?

I think about this as a series of waves. The first wave, which we are in now, is all about electrification. It is about electricity from offshore and onshore wind, in batteries, and the rapid growth of electric vehicles. In that wave the technologies are now clear, and the path towards large scale implementation is set.

The second wave, which we are just embarking on, is about carbon capture and hydrogen. Both blue hydrogen which is natural gas supported by carbon capture, and green hydrogen which is made through hydrolysis.

Then a third wave coming down the track will involve, I believe, synthetic fuels. We need to get away from traditional liquid fuels that originate from fossil sources, and there are no obvious replacements so I think synthetics may be the way forward. They could be produced directly from woody biomass or agricultural residues, or indeed using our biomass to generate power, capturing that carbon dioxide and then using that instead of storing it to create synthetic fuel. This wave may be five years away from starting, but I think in the thirties that will be a really exciting place to be.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices