The Next Generation of Financial Officers: Insights from a European CFO Roundtable | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Next Generation of Financial Officers: Insights from a European CFO Roundtable

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerEducationFinancial ServicesGovernmentHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyProfessional ServicesFinance OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionInclusion and CultureDevelopment and Transition

Article

August 17, 2022

5 min

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerEducationFinancial ServicesGovernmentHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyProfessional ServicesFinance OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionInclusion and CultureDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The European/UK CFO mandate is changing. Here we offer advice to next-generation CFO talent looking to move into the ever-evolving top role.

Close

Romain Clio

Brussels

Suzzane Wood

London

Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Financial Officers practice members, Suzzane Wood & Romain Clio, were recently invited to share RRA insights and analysis at a European CFO round table discussion.
With the aim of supporting the development of future CFOs, we summarized insights and advice from C-suite executives, board members and industry leaders on the skills and capabilities required to succeed as a CFO, both today and in the future.

The broadening role of the CFO in Europe/UK

When considering future CFO talent, boards must now consider an increasing list of market factors, including:

Evolving business models and transformation agendas

Political & economic volatility

Capital markets

Globalisation

The exponential rise of technology, robotics, and AI

Social purpose, ESG and inclusive leadership

Increased regulation

Activism

The list above highlights that boards are interested in CFO candidates with the capabilities, skills, and experience to maximize their leadership impact beyond the numbers. The CFO of the future’s mandate includes:

External stakeholder management – As a key board member, the CFO is required to manage a ESG and inclusive leadership set of stakeholders, both externally and internally, which involves increased collaboration across the business.

Flexible operating style - The CFO must be able to engage with individuals at all levels of the business, rather than functioning from an elevated position of authority.

Broader responsibilities - With the right infrastructure and technology tools in place, a CFO can effectively co-pilot a business and, with the right talent, take on additional areas such as IT/digital, procurement, legal, sustainability/ESG initiatives or even running an operating business unit.

CFOs who bring a broad set of capabilities and leadership experiences—as well as flexible personal attributes—can have an impact on the business that goes beyond the job title.

A competitive CFO market led organizations to focus on succession planning

Turnover is increasing across the current European CFO market, reaching a three year high of 17% in 2021 across eight key indices and markets in Europe and the UK (n = 330). Succession planning is paying off for internal CFO promotions, and consequentially, those recruiting externally are open to hiring for potential. Organizations are becoming more open to CFOs without traditional requirements such as accounting certifications, sector experience or previous CFO experience.

What does this mean for those looking to get promoted into a CFO role, either through external appointment or via internal promotion?

The same CFO market analysis across the eight key indices in Europe (n = 330) indicates that companies in certain markets are more inclined to appoint externally than those in other markets like Spain and France (Figure 1.) Looking closer, larger FTSE 100 groups are more likely to appoint internally, partly because they have the scale and scope to provide broader experiences, but also because these boards are actively assessing and investing in CFO succession plans, including adding external talent to strengthen the pipeline.

Figure 1. External versus internal CFO appointments

Source: RRA analysis of following indices: UK (FTSE 100), Germany (DAX), Italy (FTSE MIB), France (CAC 40), Spain (IBEX 35), Scandinavia (OMX Helsinki and OMX Stockholm), Switzerland (SMI), and Belgium (BEL 20); N= 330, April 2022

Finally, for listed groups (n = 330), experienced CFOs continue to remain the most popular external hires (Figure 2.) For first-time CFO promotions, divisional/operational CFO experience (ideally coupled with prior experience in corporate centre), is slightly preferred to group centric controllership experience, when looking at both internal and external candidates. This is likely due to focus on P&L responsibility and commercial impact. Business leadership roles are often perceived to require broader leadership skills than their controller counterparts, whose interactions with the business can slant more towards custodian/governance duties.

Figure 2. Role prior to promotion into group CFO role, internal versus external

Source: RRA analysis of following indices: UK (FTSE 100), Germany (DAX), Italy (FTSE MIB), France (CAC 40), Spain (IBEX 35), Scandinavia (OMX Helsinki and OMX Stockholm), Switzerland (SMI), and Belgium (BEL 20); n= 330, April 2022 NB. In this chart, the internal CFO role was effectively a number two to the Group CFO and was titled Deputy CFO or CFO. The CEOs were in general management roles titled President, CEO or Managing Director.

Ideally, CFO successors would have developed capabilities and leadership experiences across a variety of roles in and outside finance, including:

A role at corporate centre

P&L business partnering role

Delivered on a transformation/significant project requiring cross functional collaboration

M&A transaction

Capital markets experience

Any role that deepens knowledge of the business/sector

Boards are evaluating the whole person—not just the seat they are in—when looking for their next CFO.

Advice to next-generation CFO talent looking to move into the ever-evolving top role

The time to be agile and broaden your skillset is now. The CFO role continues to expand and is universally acknowledged as a key leadership role.

Build a diverse portfolio of business experiences/capabilities and track record of impact.

Understand the value of networking and building relationships. Stakeholder management and managing expectations internally and externally is key to your success.

Develop others while also working on your own development plan. Partner with mentors as you work towards your personal career goals.

Allow lessons you have learned to shape your leadership style. Do not rely on having a perfect resume; boards are looking for someone with strong personal character and cultural company alignment.

Methodology

Russell Reynolds Associates profiled the background and experience of 330 Chief Financial Officers within some of the largest European indices. CFOs across sectors were considered, with representation across consumer, financial services, industrial/natural resources, healthcare, technology and non-profit industries.

Authors

Romain Clio co-leads the EMEA Financial Officers Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in Brussels.

Catherine Schroeder is a member of the Financial Officers Practice knowledge team at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in Toronto.

Suzzane Wood is a member of the EMEA Financial Officers Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. She is based in London.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices