A Look at Gender and Sustainability Trends in DAX Supervisory Boards | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

A Look at Gender and Sustainability Trends in DAX Supervisory Boards

Industry TrendsNext Generation BoardsInclusive LeadershipSustainability OfficersBoard of DirectorsBoard and CEO AdvisoryInclusion and Culture

Article

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

August 10, 2023

3 min

Industry TrendsNext Generation BoardsInclusive LeadershipSustainability OfficersBoard of DirectorsBoard and CEO AdvisoryInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

The proportion of women on DAX boards has reached an all-time high as companies elected more women than men for the first time.

Close

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Munich

For the first time in the history of Germany's most important stock market index, DAX, more women than men were elected to supervisory boards.

Our annual 2023 DAX Supervisory Board Study found that 55% of all those elected to the supervisory boards of Germany's 40 largest listed companies in the last year were women. And despite a record number of women also leaving those supervisory boards, the proportion of female supervisory board members climbed to an unprecedented 38.3% (shareholder and employee representatives combined).

Read the 2023 DAX Board Study here →

Our analysis shows women now hold at least 40% of board seats (shareholder and employee representatives combined) at 19 of the DAX companies, up from 16 the previous year. At six of those companies, women hold at least half of all board seats. Of the 40 DAX companies, only Porsche SE is yet to reach 30% representation (legally required for parity co-determined companies, which is not the case for Porsche SE).

While this progress is promising, the DAX is still trailing the prime indices in France, Norway, Italy, the Netherlands, the UK, and Denmark.

Average proposition of women in (supervisory) boards of major European stock indices

* Data sources: Germany, Switzerland: own analysis; other countries: European Institute for Gender Equality (eige.europa.eu).

Progress is also mixed when looking at the distribution of power within DAX supervisory bodies. Only two of the supervisory board chairs are female (a drop to 5% from 10% in 2021). However, women now chair 20% of the committees, which is a new high.

DAX 40: Gender representation in chair positions and committees

Equal numbers of men and women on supervisory boards is now within sight

Our multi-year analysis of DAX supervisory boards suggests once the 30% quota was achieved, the proportion of women on DAX supervisory boards came to a standstill. It is only recently that the numbers of women have begun to rise again, with a significant increase in the proportion of women this year. While government quotas have, at least initially, been responsible for the rise in
female representation, societal pressure to improve gender parity further is likely to be having an effect. German companies are also experiencing the rewards of having more highly qualified women on their boards. Even without further legal action, it is therefore probable numbers of women will continue to increase. And, at least among the largest listed German companies, equal numbers of women and men on supervisory boards is now within sight.

Sustainability expertise in demand like never before

In the past, sustainability has mainly been a matter of corporate philanthropy, sitting predominantly under marketing as a public relations activity for many companies. However, this viewpoint is now shifting. It is increasingly being seen as a strategic business priority that involves significant risks and opportunities. Accordingly, sustainability expertise has never been more in demand on boards. Around two-thirds of DAX supervisory boards have now installed an ESG committee or have a member with sustainability expertise in their ranks.

Supervisory boards are also increasingly linking executive board members’ compensation to ESG targets. On average, 8% of compensation is directly linked to the achievement of ESG targets and we expect this to increase further in the coming years.

For further insights, Read the 2023 DAX Board Study here →

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Online Grocery Spiked During COVID-19. What Now?

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices