Chief Sustainability Officers Have More Impact When They’re Aligned To The CEO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Chief Sustainability Officers Have More Impact When They’re Aligned To The CEO

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

Article

July 20, 2022

7 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

How do you set your CSO up for success? We found that reporting structure is the primary differentiator of an organization’s likelihood to meet their ESG targets.

Close

Republished byHarvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance..

Businesses are more likely to hit organizational ESG targets when their sustainability leader reports directly to a CEO with a demonstrated commitment to sustainability.

Many organizations find it challenging to know where to start when adding a new Chief Sustainability Officer (CSO) role. Our recommendation is to provide them with a direct line to the CEO.

Russell Reynolds Associates’ (RRA) 2022 survey of more than 50 global sustainability leaders found that when CSOs report directly to the CEO, they are more likely to say their company is on track to hit organizational ESG targets than those who report to other business leaders.

In fact, the survey showed reporting structure is the primary differentiator of an organization’s likelihood to meet their ESG targets. Other factors, such as P&L ownership, company tenure, or past sustainability experience are far less indicative of sustainability performance.

CSOs who report to CEOs are 50% more likely to say their company is on track to meet their ESG targets than those at organizations with other reporting structures.

The rise of the “Empowered CSO”

Our analysis shows that just 34% of CSOs report to the CEO today. The vast majority report to other C-level executives or management below.

We call CSOs who report to CEOs “Empowered CSOs.” Why? Because they are more likely to operate under conditions that enable them to accelerate the change needed in their organization—whether that’s gaining access to opportunities that will help them as a leader or to information needed to make good decisions.

Being closer to leadership also enables Empowered CSOs to better collaborate and influence across the C-suite, bringing a sustainability lens to every aspect of the management of the business. This doesn’t just set them up for success personally; it also makes it more likely that the organization will hit its ESG targets.

Empowered CSOs are differentiated from those with other reporting structures in several ways:

Ecosystem of the Empowered CSO

% of Empowered CSOs compared to CSOs with other reporting structures

Source: RRA 2022 Sustainability Leaders Survey, Base n = 56 sustainability leaders

What This Means For Leadership

Simply appointing a CSO is not enough to set and meet impactful sustainability goals. Adoption of the sustainability agenda starts at the top, requiring the CEO and the board to be fully aligned on making a sustainability transformation a priority.

While alignment to the CEO is just one aspect of designing a CSO role, ensuring that the most effective person is in the role—with the right skills and experiences to elevate organizational sustainability strategy—is also crucial. Here are some important points to keep in mind:

Position CSOs as close as possible to the center of core decision-making. Best-in-class CSOs are multi-level systems thinkers, able to identify risks and opportunities other leaders may miss. These are business value creation roles and need to report to leaders at the top. For the CSO function to contribute as much value as possible, they must have the opportunity to bring a sustainability lens to all aspects of the organization.

Ensure the CEO and board are aligned around the importance and potential of sustainability. Without visible and authentic buy-in from the top, a CSO’s impact will be constrained. Both should regularly review progress against tangible, science-based sustainability targets.

Provide the CSO with opportunities to engage with the board and other key stakeholders. The CEO should look to the CSO as their partner in building support for the sustainability strategy across the organization, and as another “face” of the sustainability effort when engaging with investors and other stakeholders.

Empowering the CSO role by aligning them to the CEO, embracing a greater scope, and setting more multi-faceted ESG targets is a powerful way to accelerate your organization’s sustainability action plan.

Meet Our Sustainable Leadership Experts

Sarah Galloway

London

Kurt Harrison

New York

Related Reading

The Board’s Role in Sustainability

Next-Generation Sustainable Board Directors

Divides and Dividends

Leadership for the Decade of Action (UNGC)

Read more
Read more
Read more
Read more

View more sustainability insights

Methodology

Russell Reynolds Associates debuted their first sustainability and ESG leadership survey in Spring of 2022, a survey of global sustainability executives. The survey asked respondents to share their background and career experiences, current role and responsibilities, access to opportunities and information, and the level of support they receive.

It also surveyed executives’ engagement with external and internal stakeholders, and the plans for their position to evolve. Executives shared their thoughts on the barriers and enablers of success for sustainability leader roles, as well as the impact of their position on organizational sustainability goals. Over 50 sustainability leaders responded to the survey, nearly 50% of executives represent companies with revenue between $1 billion USD and $25 billion USD and 50% with 5,000-100,000 employees. Executives’ geographic regions included 61% from the Americas, 29% from Europe, and 10% from Asia.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices