How 3 CEOs won the sustainability bet | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

These CEOs bet billions on seemingly unrealistic sustainability projects–and won. I asked them how

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipConsumerIndustrialTechnologySustainability OfficersInnovation, Research, and Development

Article

Clarke Murphy

January 16, 2023

5 min

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipConsumerIndustrialTechnologySustainability OfficersInnovation, Research, and Development

Executive Summary

Read how three CEOs are making big strides in sustainability by setting big, hairy, audacious goals before ironing out all the details.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

Sustainability has emerged as the defining issue of our time. What was until relatively recently a niche issue has suddenly become everyone’s most pressing priority.

But how can companies turn their goodwill into action? How do we go from pledge to practice?

As a former CEO myself, I know only too well how daunting that challenge can be. There are so many unanswered questions and so little time to seek answers.

One of the great privileges of my current job is having direct access to some of the world’s greatest CEOs—those who have the vision, courage, and grit to make huge strides toward sustainability.

They prove that it’s possible to do good in the world and grow your business at the same time. We’ve spent hundreds of thousands of hours trying to decode their DNA and understand exactly why they succeed where others fail.

The answers can often be counterintuitive. For example, you might assume that being a perfectionist is a good thing. But when it comes to sustainability, being a “100 percenter” can hold you back.

The CEOs and companies who are making the biggest strides are the ones setting big, hairy, audacious goals before they’ve ironed out all the details.

Here are three examples.

The Tesla of the seas

Imagine the chutzpah it takes to invest $15 million into building the world’s first driverless, crewless, zero-emissions container ship—when you don’t even know if such a ship would ever be allowed to set sail or drop anchor under maritime law.

Yet that’s exactly what global fertilizer giant Yara International’s CEO, Svein Tore Holsether, did. Taking inspiration from Elon Musk, Svein created a “Tesla of the seas” despite many unknowns: Would it cope with heavy traffic in large ports? Might it collide with whales, seals, or even kayakers? Without a crew on board, how do you manage faults and repairs? Can a computer ever make better decisions than a human Captain?

Despite all these questions, Svein pushed ahead. Why? Because he knew that by the time he had all the answers, it would be too late to act. As he told me, “You have to be at the forefront of things and demonstrate what can be done. I’d rather be fired for taking too much of a risk and making a mistake than not acting soon enough. You need to build first, talk later.”

Of course, Svein’s leap of faith wasn’t a stab in the dark. It was an educated and calculated risk, based on the best available science. But while another CEO might have waited until they had all the answers, Svein dared to steer into the unknown.

Thanks to his bold and decisive action, the Yara Birkeland is now a reality and undergoing two years of testing. Once up and running, it has the potential to save a staggering 40,000 truck trips and 1,000 tons of CO2 a year.

Not so insurmountable

If investing $15 million in a ship that might never be allowed to set sail sounds audacious, then how about spending $2 billion on a fleet of clean containerships when you don’t know where you’ll get enough green fuel to power them?

Meet Søren Skou, CEO of the global shipping giant Maersk. When Søren announced his plans, it was a massive risk. Green containerships cost about 15% more to build. And green fuel costs more than double, assuming you can even find enough to power your ships.

But again, Søren’s big gamble was an educated one. He saw which way the winds of sustainability were blowing. He knew that somewhere out there in this big wide world, where sustainability is everyone’s number one mission, there would be a solution.

He was right. In Søren’s words, “All those problems at the start that we thought were so huge we had no idea how to overcome turned out not to be so insurmountable.”

As it transpired, Yara (yes, the very same) and Ørsted came forward with the answers. Søren’s timing also proved to be prescient: The likes of Unilever, Amazon, and Ikea (some of Maersk’s biggest customers) have since announced plans to only use zero-carbon logistics partners by 2040.

“Our ambition to have a carbon-neutral fleet by 2050 was a moonshot when we announced it in 2018,” Søren said. “Today we see it as a challenging, yet achievable target to reach.”

The art of doubling down

Not long after becoming CEO of Adidas, Kasper Rorsted decided to launch a small and experimental line of shoes made from recycled ocean plastic. It was called Parley, named after the environmental nonprofit Parley for the Oceans, which co-developed it.

Once again, there were plenty of unanswered questions. Would they be able to find enough recycled ocean plastic to scale up? How well would it perform? Kasper and his people spent a lot of time finding the answers. But they became so obsessed with the detail, that they lost sight of the marketing.

Adidas had created the perfect sneaker, but their consumer knew nothing about it. His team got so deeply into the weeds of the design and execution that it eclipsed the marketing of the product. They lost passion for the big picture of what Parley was all about, then failed to communicate its message–that all-important market differentiator of depolluting our oceans from plastic–to the rest of the world.
However, Kasper learned an invaluable lesson–and he was not afraid to turn up the volume on his next target: to make nine out of 10 of Adidas’s products, from running shoes to soccer jerseys, out of reusable materials to end plastic waste by 2025.

He intentionally held himself externally accountable because “eventually the world will come and chase you on it.” Many within Adidas balked. They were afraid of not meeting this goal, which was understandable, but Kasper believed it was his role as leader to push his team to set all their reservations aside, go hard, and rise to this public declaration.

As he said: “Make it simple, make it public, and drive the behavior.”

This article originally appeared in Fortune.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices