6 Key Trends & Takeaways From Expo West 2023 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

6 Key Trends & Takeaways From Expo West 2023

Industry TrendsConsumer

Article

March 28, 2023

5 min

Industry TrendsConsumer

Executive Summary

Expo West 2023 showcased a range of plant-based options, gluten-free opportunities, functional foods and beverages, and more.

Close

Dana Dimitri

Chicago

Andrew Hayes

Houston
New York

Expo West 2023, the world’s biggest exhibition of natural and organic products, was held at the Anaheim Convention Center from March 7-11th with over 65,000 registered attendees and over 3,000 exhibiting brands. This year’s event showcased many trends, including: plant-based options, gluten-free opportunities, functional foods and beverages, and more.

The natural products industry has grown significantly over the past decade, causing its influence on the broader food manufacturing and consumer packaged goods landscape to expand as well. This consistent growth suggests that regardless of economic and geopolitical turmoil, the natural products industry will continue to thrive. Russell Reynolds Associates attended Expo West 2023, and identified some key takeaways below.

Sustainability leading to private label growth

Over 80% of private label products performed better with a sustainability claim vs. not. The smaller brands performed better, and the mid-size brands performed least well compared to their non-sustainable peers.”

– Steve Noble
Senior partner at McKinsey & Company

Of the products that featured sustainability claims at the show, private brands were among the most popular. While specific claims do not necessarily drive consumers’ purchase decisions, the focus on sustainability shows the intersection between consumers wanting high-value products, and the need to make a difference with what they are purchasing. Many brands at Expo West put sustainability at the forefront of their products, from sourcing ingredients to animal welfare, with some even including sustainability callouts on their packaging.

New opportunities in gluten-free

Gluten-free has been a core attribute to the natural and specialty space…for the past couple decades, [it has] really led the way in a lot of the allergen-friendly paths that we’ve seen.”

– Scott Dicker
Director of market insights at SPINS

The gluten-free market is seeing price increases grow at a lower rate than other “better-for-you" categories. In the past, gluten-free options generally focused on the staples like shelf-stable grains and breads/cereals. However, consumers are starting to seek gluten-free products in new categories such as alcohol, supplements, pet treats, and more. Across categories, brands are seeing growth in this space.

Plant-based moving beyond dairy and meat

It was clear that buyers and consumers are now seeking brands that can provide real, simple, and clean ingredients more than ever...”

– Penny Andino
Vice president of marketing at Justin's

At Expo West 2023, brands showcased their plant-based offerings that went beyond the stereotypical dairy and meat-alternative options. Multiple brands at Expo West introduced new candies that included low- or no-sugar claims, as well as plant-based formulas. Not only is the confectionary market expanding into plant-based options, but the seafood industry is as well. A majority of the total adult U.S. population is engaged with plant-based foods, which demonstrates the size and potential of the category1.

Functional ingredients are top of mind

Functional foods and beverages grew an estimated 5.8% to $87.3 billion in 2022, driven in part by increasing demand and availability of prebiotics.”

– Carlotta Mast
Senior vice president and market leader at New Hope Network

Many brands at Expo West unveiled new drinks that include additives meant to aid with gut health, including ingredients like chicory root fiber, agave inulin, Jerusalem artichoke, and apple cider vinegar.

Mushrooms are both medicinal and delicious

The interest in mushroom-based food and beverage products is largely based on their mushroom’s functional properties. Research has found that [these properties]…provide a host of benefits, from blood glucose control to boosting heart health…”

– Nirmal Nair
Founder and CEO of Sempera Organics

Over the past few years, mushrooms have increasingly become a popular ingredient in a wide variety of products, from snacks to ready-to-drink (RTD) beverages. Mushrooms were found in many different forms at the Expo, including in jerky products promoted by Pan’s and Moku, as well as cutlets and steaks by Meati. A milk alternative created by Shroom Junkie was of the most innovative new uses of mushroom. Medicinal mushrooms also continue to rise in popularity in several beverage categories.

Regenerative agriculture is the next big thing

More and more brands that weren’t founded for the benefit of regenerative are talking about strategies for ESG, and how to create methodologies for carbon accounting based on new regulations and industry expectations.”

– Jessica Rubino
Vice president of content at New Hope Network

The distinct pivot toward embracing regenerative certifications and ingredients among brands isn’t just taking place among small, nimble start-ups. Now, larger companies are tapping into the trend as well. Simple Mills, a large brand with products ranging from cookies to pizza dough mix is one of the brands leading the charge into this facet of sustainability.

Reflections on Expo West 2023

It’s always tempting to zero in on the year’s hottest innovations or the latest go-to ingredients, but it’s important to recognize that these trends are reflections and manifestations of the much broader cultural forces that are truly driving today’s natural products industry.”

– Jessica Rubino
Vice president of content at New Hope Network

Though the future of the consumer packaged goods industry is unclear due to inflation and geopolitical tensions around the world, the innovation and expansion of product choices from Natural Products Expo West 2023 certainly bodes well for the year ahead.

Authors

Dana Dimitri is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ CPG practice. She is based in Chicago.
Andrew Hayes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ CPG practice. He is jointly based in New York and Houston.
Amanda Johnson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Knowledge team. She is based in Dallas.
Sotiria Pericli is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

Sources

1 Panel Recap: State of Plant-Based Series @ Expo West - Plant Based Foods Association

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices