Why employee experience matters—and how boards can take meaningful action | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why Employee Experience Matters—And How Boards Can Take Meaningful Action

Board and CEO AdvisoryBoard of Directors

Article

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

April 04, 2023

3 min

Board and CEO AdvisoryBoard of Directors

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Boards can guide how employee voice is systematically captured, analyzed, and integrated to further improve organizational health.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

State Street Global Advisors, Ford Foundation, and Russell Reynolds Associates conducted interviews with public board directors in the US and UK, who bring a wide range of boardroom perspectives on employee voice.

These conversations informed the development of a board-employee voice maturity model and guidance around how to integrate employee voice into board oversight. This research provides a view on how to strengthen boardroom discussions of human capital management, and offers insights into how companies can solicit greater insights from the workforce to improve organizational health.

Our interviews focused on three aspects:

The impact of employee voice and how board members use it as a strategic input for decision-making

Key mechanisms for capturing employee voice and the frequency with which it is leveraged at the board level

How board oversight of employee voice can be structured

We define “employee voice” as the perspectives, interests, and needs of the workforce, encompassing a wide range of employees, such as full-time, part-time, and contract.

Employees are among an organization’s most strategic assets. Monica Lozano, a current board member at Apple, Bank of America, and Target, voiced that “investing in human capital is a strategic decision, similar to investments in technology or infrastructure, and employee voice is key to maintaining the organization as a workplace of choice. Employee voice is a mechanism for innovation and customer intelligence.”

In order to incorporate employee voice into strategic oversight, boards need to deepen their understanding of the employee experience.

Although the majority of directors say they are frequently reviewing data on employee turnover and engagement, notably fewer say they have a strong understanding of the day-to-day experience of the employee base, and less than half have direct exposure to front-line and junior employees. When asked about which functions their board needs more exposure to, directors’ number one response was human resources.

Key Findings

51%

of global executives identified employees as a top three stakeholder.
Source: Russell Reynolds Associates 2022 Q2 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,590 global executives.

40%

of board directors have direct exposure to front-line and junior employees.
Source: Russell Reynolds Associates 2022 Q2 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 259 global board directors.

42%

of board directors said they
would benefit from increased exposure to HR.
Source: Russell Reynolds Associates 2022 Q2 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 259 global board directors.

Where does your organization sit on our board and employee engagement maturity model?

Based on insights from the directors interviewed, and supplemented by existing research, we have developed a board and employee engagement maturity model that demonstrates the varied sophistication with which boards engage with employee voice. It also provides key considerations for boards as they integrate employee voice into board oversight.

Reactive

Mindset: Employee voice is a sounding board for talent management hygiene.

Employee engagement discussed as needed

Ad-hoc metrics

Proactive

Mindset: Employee voice
improves operations and
mitigates risk

Regular employee engagement survey with pulse surveys

Annual board discussion on employee engagement and key metrics

Systematic frontline interactions

Focus on HR metrics

Integrated

Mindset: Employee voice
elevates organizational
health.

Organization appropriately pivots strategies based on employee insights

Employees understand the role of the board and leverages board interactions as needed

Integrates people metrics and business/financial metrics to inform decision-making

How can boards effectively oversee employee voice?

Read insights from the directors we interviewed on how boards can effectively oversee employee voice, and the key questions that boards should be considering.

Read full report

How we help you make the right decisions for your employees

Employee experience matters. Every day, we help leadership teams gain an honest, accurate understanding of the employee experience, and work strategically with businesses to deliver actionable plans to make lasting changes in the most crucial areas.

Learn more about our board and CEO advisory services here.

Authors

Joy Tan and Tom Handcock of RRA’s Center for Leadership Insight conducted the research and authored this report.

Rusty O’Kelley III co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. He is based in New York.

Learn more about the authors and the Center for Leadership Insight

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Private EquityPrivate CreditBoard of Directors

Why Athletes Make Effective Leaders

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices