Expanding into APAC? What to Know About Operations & Supply Chain Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Expanding into APAC? What to Know About Operations & Supply Chain Leadership

Industry TrendsOperations and Supply Chain OfficersAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

Vijuraj Eranazhath

May 23, 2023

10 min

Industry TrendsOperations and Supply Chain OfficersAssessment and Benchmarking

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Companies expanding into APAC must embrace leaders’ motivators, provide equal opportunities across geographies, and supercharge development.

Close

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

Due to a combination of commercial & geopolitical considerations, US & Europe-headquartered multinational companies are looking to diversify their operational footprint in Asia Pacific beyond China to additional Asian manufacturing markets.

C-suite operations & supply chain leaders refers to C-suite operations, procurement and supply chain executives.

To do this successfully & sustainably, identifying the right talent for the top supply chain roles is crucial. However, many companies with headquarters outside APAC often lack an understanding of the key differentiators between APAC and broader global supply chain talent. As a result, these organizations are often unprepared to recruit, develop, and retain the region’s operations and supply chain officers (OSCO) top talent.

Additionally, as supply chains evolve in a post-pandemic world, it is imperative for global organizations to leverage their APAC supply chain leadership talent to drive innovation and productive disruption around themes like digital, sustainability & diversity.

To understand these differences, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed proprietary psychometric data for 114 APAC operations and supply chain C-suite leaders and compared this to psychometric data for 874 global (excluding APAC) leaders in equivalent positions. We learned that operations and supply chain leaders in Asia Pacific:

Index higher on curiosity, while global leaders are more oriented towards outcomes.

Enjoy being in environments where they positively impact other people and society.

Are used to more hierarchical environments, and are more motivated by recognition.

APAC operations & supply chain leaders index higher on curiosity, while global leaders are oriented towards outcomes

Global operations and supply chain leaders are more aligned to outcomes and results, while those in Asia Pacific index higher on curiosity and learning orientation.

Russell Reynolds Associates found that 65% of global OSCO leaders achieved high scores in ambition, while only 44% of APAC OSCO leaders achieved high scores in this category. Alternatively, 68% of APAC leaders achieved high scores in learning approaches, while only 54% of global leaders fell into the high score category. APAC leaders also outpaced global leaders in terms of inquisitiveness, scoring 14 percentage points higher in this category (54% versus 40%)

Figure 1: Ambition vs. Inquisitive: Global vs. APAC OSCO Leaders

Source: RRA APAC Operations & Supply Chain Officers Psychometric Study, n = 114 (APAC) & n = 874 (global)

Curiosity is an important leadership competency for operations and supply chain officers, especially as it relates to questioning the status quo and asking disruptive questions of current supply chains.

There are multiple examples of supply chain innovation being driven first in APAC within large global multinationals. For example, a large personal care US-HQ FMCG player in China drove its e-commerce channel share from less than 5% in 2017 to over 35% in 2022 through direct partnerships with Chinese platforms like JD.com and Tmall.com. This included supply chain aspects like warehouse optimization, process redesign, and systems integration.

An operations and supply chain officer who has worked in Asia and other global regions recounted how he saw a tendency in Asia to disaggregate the supply chain to look for efficiency and effectiveness opportunities at a granular level. This need to “look under the hood” bears witness to a curious mindset. The instinct in the US and Europe is to build, scale, and leverage consolidation services, thus avoiding detail in favor of outcomes.

APAC operations & supply chain leaders enjoy being in environments where they positively impact other people and society

Operations and supply chain leaders in APAC are highly motivated by altruism, with 68% of respondents achieving high scores in this category. This is significantly higher than global operations and supply chain officers, of which only 41% achieved high scores. The inverse of this is also interesting—global leaders were more than twice as likely to achieve low scores in altruism than APAC OSCO leaders.

Figure 2: Altruistic Leadership: Global vs APAC OSCO Leaders

Source: RRA APAC Operations & Supply Chain Officers Psychometric Study, n = 114 (APAC) & n = 874 (global)

This finding is consistent with our other culture studies comparing Asia and the rest of the world. Leaders in APAC consistently rank higher in “Power Distance,” which signifies leaders who place themselves on a pedestal vs. those who position themselves as relatable equals to their direct reports. This, in turn, puts subtle pressure on leaders to “protect” their subordinates.

We also see this altruism reflected in heightened attention to environment concerns. APAC leaders are much more likely to focus on sustainability parameters than their global counterparts. As we learned in our 2022 Divides & Dividends: Leadership Actions for a Sustainable Future report, seven out of ten next-generation Indian leaders have taken on three or more job responsibilities to improve environmental and social outcomes. This is significantly higher than the global average of 40%. Reinforcing this, a 2020 survey conducted by EY found that 67% of APAC respondents are taking steps to bring more sustainability to supply chains, compared to 52% of global respondents.

Case Study

One of the largest global fast-moving consumer goods players combined their “go-premium” strategy with their sustainability objectives through initiatives around sustainable formulations & packaging material, lean product launches, and go-to-market plans based on different products’ life cycles. This organization worked closely with regulators in both Europe and China to align on approvals for a specific environment-friendly ingredient in their haircare products, which met ESG standards for both regions. Bringing cross-regional operations & supply chain leadership to the discussion helped drive new sustainability outcomes for the organization globally.

APAC operations & supply chain leaders are used to more hierarchical environments, and are more motivated by recognition than their global counterparts

APAC operations & supply chain leaders are more than twice as likely to be highly motivated by recognition than their global counterparts (51% vs. 22%).

To that point, it’s crucial to ensure that specific opportunities are reserved for and evenly distributed across APAC, as recognition is especially motivating to leaders in this region. A natural affiliation for similar perspectives and the fact that, despite recent increases, the share of APAC leaders in global businesses is still low may lead to a lack of acknowledgement for APAC leaders’ accomplishments.

Another manifestation of the "Power Distance,” (referenced above) is that employees in APAC tend to look at their leaders for guidance and validation, deliberately seeking recognition from their leader, who  often occupies a “parental figure” position in an organization. This level of deference frequently confounds leaders from outside the region. External leaders who are unfamiliar with this practice often mistake numerous check-ins during execution from otherwise competent professionals as lack of confidence or just unwillingness to “get on with it.” Instead, leaders working within APAC for the first time should reframe this perception and embrace frequent check-ins, using them to recognize and encourage progress.

Figure 3: Heroic vs Vulnerable Leadership: Global vs APAC OSCO Leaders

Source: RRA APAC Operations & Supply Chain Officers Psychometric Study, n = 114 (APAC) & n = 874 (global)

Recommendations

Expanding supply chain operations across the Asia Pacific is a complicated task. However, investing in APAC supply chain leadership today will allow companies to significantly outpace competition to win globally tomorrow. To identify, retain, and develop leading APAC operations & supply chain talent, organizations should consider the following:

Embrace APAC OSCO leaders’ learning orientation, curiosity and altruistic motivations.

Ensure there are enough cross-functional forums and opportunities for APAC operations & supply chain leaders to partner with their global counterparts. To capitalize on APAC leaders’ increased focus on sustainability parameters, consider incubating new sustainability strategies and processes in the region, allowing leaders in the region to take ownership.

Provide equal opportunities across geographies, always considering differing cultural contexts.

Ensure that opportunities are evenly distributed globally, including new APAC operations & supply chain officers in business contexts where innovation is key. Be cognizant of what opportunities are reserved for senior leadership and which can be cascaded across levels. Distributing ownership and advancement opportunities across levels, while also providing for a slightly higher cadence of recognition to APAC leaders, is crucial to talent retention.

Authors

Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.

Dheeraj Vashista leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group in Asia Pacific. He is based in Gurgaon.

Christina Wilson leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Australia. She is based in Melbourne.

Aishwarya Ahuja leads research for Russell Reynolds Associates Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. She is based in Mumbai.

Atreya Brindavanam is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in Gurgaon.

Expanding into APAC?

What to Know About Operations & Supply Chain Leadership

Download here

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices