Talent Trends in Real Estate 2022 – Shaping What’s Next | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Talent Trends in Real Estate 2022 – Shaping What’s Next

Industry TrendsSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalReal EstateBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

September 06, 2022

5 min

Industry TrendsSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalReal EstateBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and Benchmarking

Executive summary

Russell Reynolds Associates captured 4 emerging themes that reshape the 2022 talent landscape.

Close

Debra Barbanel

Los Angeles

Cameron Scott

New York

Across the real estate industry, boards and C-suites conducting succession planning face numerous headwinds, including limited (and expensive) talent pools, rapid changes in market sentiment, and steep competition, all of which are occurring within a backdrop of global macroeconomic unease. These challenges have had profound implications for the talent market in 2022, as both employers and candidates adjust to a period of deep uncertainty.

The War for Talent1 from 2021 continued into the first half of 2022 through rapid increase in C-suite turnover, explosive growth in debt funds, and growing sophistication and capital raising success of small and mid-market firms. While we anticipate overall hiring volume to slow slightly through the remainder of 2022, multifamily continues to see strong talent demands, particularly with the flight from urban cities to secondary markets (such as Florida, Nashville, and Texas) and widespread housing shortages. Office use is still drastically down, with the vacancy rate at 18.1% nationally – only slightly lower than the pandemic peak of 18.5%.2 As for occupancy rates, still less than a third of workers are back in office in cities such as San Francisco, while the city of Austin led the return charge, with approximately 60% of workers back in office. 3

Amid this backdrop, RRA has observed the following changes in the talent marketplace:

1. Uptick in senior level activity in asset management

As interest rates increased, Russell Reynolds experienced a corresponding increase in demand for senior level asset management (AM) talent. In fact, 25% of our new work in the last 60 days has come from the AM area – compared to just 10% in the last 12 months.4 Even clients who have yet to begin searches are seeking counsel on structuring the AM function. These clients are aiming to protect their assets and  maximize existing value in the face of uncertainty. There is a new premium being placed on asset management; with it comes increased demand for a sophisticated and financially savvy approach. Specifically, we see demand for several key characteristics:

Exceptionally strong financial and analytical skills, with an ability to model the impact of various capital stacks and rate changes on asset values

Creative and strategic leadership style; comfortable being vocal during investment and divestiture decisions

Hands on and “close to the asset” style, with asset-class specific expertise; confidence jumping into difficult situations to maximize results

Experience working across multiple investment cycles and managing portfolios through downturns, bringing a creative perspective on how to create value

2. Candidates have increased risk aversion in a move

Increased market uncertainty has heightened candidates’ risk aversion, which has manifested in two distinct patterns of behavior:

First, many candidates are no longer willing to consider a move. Well-placed executives have built up personal capital and financial rewards (both short and long term) in their current situations. They view the prospect of being the “LIFO” individual as more potential risk in an already uncertain market.

Second, those who remain open to a move are looking for ways to manage this risk. We see this happening in terms of real security or financial terms, including more guaranteed compensation, longer time-frames, and heightened focus on severance and related elements. We also see this risk management in perceived security or non-financial terms, in the form of increased connectivity with leadership and the board; a solid, realistic strategy and an understanding of the financial resources in place to execute this strategy; and a clear understanding of the company’s overall risk profile.

3. Increased investment in internal development

RRA research reveals that the retention and engagement of next-gen leaders hinges on greater transparency around succession practices. Importantly, adopting robust and engaging development plans can enhance the fit of next-gen leaders or “out of the box” talent ideas, providing confidence to both the individual and the hiring team.

With the maturation of human capital within the real estate industry, leading-edge organizations are tackling succession by establishing a programmatic yearly review of their human capital needs, often facilitated by an external provider. Progressive organizations have started laying the groundwork for the evolution of the leadership team two to five years in advance. There is effectively a “heat” map for each position and a timeline for the role’s corresponding development needs. Importantly, development plans and experiences are formulated with an eye towards internal candidates who could be positioned for the next leadership spot. This kind of investment in an individual’s development strongly links that person to the company.

4. Shifting compensation dynamics going into year-end

Over the last 18 months, we saw significant increases in total compensation across the board, as employers needed to guarantee retention in key functions and at all seniority levels. At the beginning of 2022, we were dealing with a candidate’s market; however, over the past few months we have started to see the pendulum swinging back to employers. With some market softening and deal flow slowing, there will be less emphasis on using compensation as a retention tool. We will continue monitoring this trend as the year continues.

The most successful leadership teams understand the interconnected nature of these real estate trends and recognize that talent at all levels of the organization is key to resilience in the face of economic and geo-political headwinds.

Sources

1 Russell Reynolds Associates, Talent Trends in Real Estate 2022

2 Moody’s Analytics, Where Office Vacancy Stands as Working from Home Becomes Mainstream

3 The Real Deal, Office Occupancy in New York Finally Hits 40%

4 Russell Reynolds Associates, Real Estate Search Volume: 2021 vs 2022

Authors

Deb Barbanel Deb Barbanel leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Real Estate practice. She is based in Los Angeles.

Kristi Walters is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Real Estate Practice. She is based in Dallas.

Cameron Scott is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Real Estate Practice. She is based in New York.

James Baek is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services knowledge team. He is based in New York.

Learn More About the Authors and The Real Estate Practice

Learn more

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices