The Science Behind C-suite Success: Your CxOs Need This Skill | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Science Behind C-suite Success: Your CxOs Need This Skill

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipExecutive Search

Article

September 01, 2022

5 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipExecutive Search

Executive Summary

The requirements of a high-performing CxO have fundamentally shifted—it’s time for a new approach.

Close

Jim Hinds

London

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

Back to C-suite Success main page

At a time when everything is uncertain, one thing is true: Our world is changing, and it’s changing fast. For CEOs, this presents new—and unprecedented—challenges. Business-as-usual will not cut it anymore. The day job has become much more complex and nuanced. And that means that the people you surround yourself with matter more than ever before.

Recent macro events are forcing CEOs to rethink what it means to be a great C-suite executive. The leadership qualities that worked in the past are unlikely to be relevant in the future. What helped someone make it to the executive team a decade ago, may not help them stay there in the decade ahead.

Indeed, research shows that a worrying 66% of CEOs don’t think their C-suite is fit for the challenges of the next decade. That matters. Without the right people on the top team, who are working together in the right way, CEOs will struggle to make high-impact decisions in real time, leading to stakeholder backlash, drift, and competitive decline.

So, how can you make a confident decision about your next CxO? What does it take to lead successfully in an unstable world? And what specific skills should you look out for? Here, we provide some answers.

Most leaders still think of CxOs as functional or regional/category experts. But, as the world shifts on its axis, the definitions of what it means to be a successful executive must also shift.

The five ways the CxO role is changing today.

The Individual Shift. The best CxOs are not only high-performing individuals who focus on their individual P&L goals and KPIs. They are also high-performing team players, who work with their peers to push the entire organization toward its strategic vision.

The Expertise Shift. It is no longer just about subject expertise. CxOs must also show behavioral agility. They must be able to adapt quickly to changing circumstances, be unafraid to wade into new terrain, and work with others to find a new path forward.

The Results Shift. CxOs need to deliver more than discrete results. They must fuel enterprise-wide success. That includes helping the organization stay ahead of the latest business challenges, whether that’s sustainability, or digital transformation.

The Legacy Shift. It is not just about building the right executive team today. You also need to build your bench of CxOs for tomorrow. Every CxO must play a proactive role in helping to identify and develop the rising stars across your organization who will help secure long-term business performance.

The Culture Shift. Leadership teams must not only adapt but foster drive cultural change. Your CxOs need to understand—and actively embrace—their role as torchbearers for the organization’s purpose, values, and culture.

With these changes, the path to CxO performance is becoming more challenging. To adapt, functional leaders must find opportunities to develop beyond their domain expertise and become more enterprise-focused, digitally savvy, sustainability-minded, and team orientated. Adopting a faster, more agile way of approaching problems will also be key, as will the ability to work across silos to innovate and execute solutions on the fly.

This is new territory for many CxOs. And they must learn these skills while also facing investor pressures, geopolitical disruption, board influence, and increased C-suite turnover. The job is by no means easy.

For CEOs, that makes it even harder to find the CxOs you need to secure long-term performance. But there is a specific trait to look out for that will help you identify those who are up to the challenge, and thereby de-risk the process of C-suite hires and promotions.

The ability to flex

Through our work at Russell Reynolds Associates, we know that the most successful CxOs can flex their approach—bringing different skills to the fore, depending on the specific situation they face. They embody both ‘loud’ and ‘quiet’ competencies. They show both rational and emotional intelligence. And they are able to handle contradictory, sometimes conflicting, ideas simultaneously.

It is this paradoxical expression of personality (and the resulting agility) that sets the most successful leaders apart. These traits are not at odds with each other; they happily coexist. And they give leaders the much-needed dexterity to navigate an uncertain, and fast-moving world. As each new situation arises, executives understand exactly which behaviors they need to draw on to find a way forward.

Through empirically validated research, we found the most effective C-suite leaders typically “span” four dualities:

Being both disruptive and pragmatic. Great leaders know when to disrupt the status quo with innovation, and when to be pragmatic about focus, priorities, and the pace of transformation.

Being both risk-taking and reluctant. Great leaders know when to take calculated risks and be opportunistic, and when to show vigilance before steering the organization off a cliff.

Being both heroic and vulnerable. Great leaders are heroic, but they are also vulnerable, knowing how to ensure perseverance and grit don’t turn into self-delusions. They take feedback and external data to heart and make continuous improvements to themselves and their organizations.

Being both galvanizing and connecting. Great leaders galvanize support with energy and inspiration, but they also know when to take a step back, share credit, and promote the success of others. They can connect the organization to become something stronger and greater than themselves and the cult of their own personality.

Ultimately, every organization will have its own requirements for what they need from their CxOs, now and in the future. But from our work with leading companies around the world, we know that assessing whether a leader possesses the agility to flex between these four paradoxical traits is a strong indicator of whether they will thrive in the C-suite.

So, when you’re looking for your next CxO—whether for your top team today or tomorrow—think about whether they have the behavioral agility to flex their approach. It will be the critical differentiator between top team performance and demise.

WE WOULD LOVE TO PARTNER WITH YOU

Start developing your C-suite to deliver even greater success
with our experts

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices