Back to School: Moving Beyond Sustainability Rhetoric | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Back to School: Moving Beyond Sustainability Rhetoric

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability Officers

Article

Clarke Murphy

July 18, 2023

5 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

Too many companies are getting caught “greenwashing.” It’s time to turn talking into action.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

Every year, we see large companies issue statements expressing their desire for sustainability. It’s easy to do, but turning words into effective action requires a distinct set of leadership skills that often come as a stretch or even an afterthought to many top executives.

I’ve spent a good deal of time exploring how CEOs and other leaders can truly move the dial on sustainability—through my day job at Russell Reynolds Associates, for my recently published book, Sustainable Leadership, and in conversations with top executives for the Redefiners podcast.

I’ve also had the privilege of sharing my experiences with top CEOs and other senior leaders from across the world at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Sloan School of Management Executive Education.

Together with MIT, RRA has co-developed an immersive sustainable leadership program that’s designed to help leaders develop the specific skills they need to pivot their organizations to a more sustainable future. MIT methodologies paired with real-world case studies from RRA interviews and client work is a powerful learning tool.

Here’s just some of what I’ve shared with the participants:

1. Sometimes, sustainable leadership comes from a flash of inspiration

Many sustainable leaders have an “aha” moment that leads to a different mindset. Svein Tore Holsether, President and CEO of Yara International, heard his call to action on the streets of Paris. During a Redefiners episode, he described the profound impact of protesters outside the 2015 Paris Climate Conference on him and his company.

“Seeing the youth engagement, the demonstrations in front of the buildings, the fact that business was getting involved made a huge impression on me,” he told me. “I understood that everything I had thought about our strategy would change…I made the decision then that we need to think completely differently.” Svein’s global fertilizer company had always considered feeding the world its core purpose. His experience in Paris convinced him that Yara had to embed sustainability within that purpose.

And when sustainable leaders have experienced these redefining moments, they are not afraid to completely transform their business through sustainability. As Lynn Good, CEO of Duke Energy, who I interviewed for my book, told me: “Sustainability is not an adjunct; it’s not another initiative; it’s not something we keep track of on the side. Rather, it’s completely integrated with the company’s overall strategy, which is to be a leader in the clean energy transition.” And she’s done just that. As of 2021, the company had reduced CO2 emissions by 44%, sulfur dioxide emissions by 98%, and nitrogen oxide emissions by 83%.

2. Sustainable leaders doggedly seek more insights

Nearly all effective sustainable leaders start by educating themselves. The problems facing our planet are complex and ever-changing, and new solutions are emerging rapidly. In addition to examining sustainability efforts within his sector, Svein gathered insights from leaders in other sectors, including Unilever CEO Paul Polman. He joined the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, the World Economic Forum’s Alliance of CEO Climate Leaders, and other sustainability-focused business groups.

As he put it, “You shouldn’t be ashamed to copy from others.”

I also had a fascinating conversation for Redefiners with Feike Sijbesma, CEO Emeritus of Royal DSM, who transformed the organization from bulk chemicals to being a leader in nutrition, health, and bio-sciences (not your average transformation!). He was clear that “Leadership starts with insight: insight into yourself, insight in the people you work with, and insight in the world you operate in … And you only get that insight when you listen, when you read, when you observe when you travel.” As he told me, “The sad thing is when people develop into leaders, they go on stage, teaching and telling stories, instead of listening.”

3. Sustainable leaders are bold, but not reckless

A well-balanced risk appetite is a vital component of sustainable leadership. Svein demonstrated this trait when Yara invested $15 million in the world’s first emission-free cargo ship. The Yara Birkeland will transport the company’s products and is expected to replace the equivalent of 40,000 diesel truck trips and the associated emissions.

“I’d rather be fired for taking too much of a risk and making a mistake than not acting soon enough,” Svein told me when I interviewed him for my book.

Likewise, Søren Skou, CEO of AP Moller-Maersk, invested $2bn in 12 containerships but didn’t know where he would find the green methanol fuel to power them. Of course, he has now worked with others to find a solution, and as he told me, “All those problems at the start that we thought were so huge [and] we had no idea how to overcome turned out not to be so insurmountable.”

4. Sustainable leaders inspire and guide

Organizations can’t achieve their sustainability commitments through edicts from management. Success requires the active involvement of people within the organization who make change happen. And that requires leaders to create a culture of innovation and experimentation.

One of the most fascinating insights from my recent conversation with Feike was that he regularly held funerals for failed innovations. One was held after the company had spent millions developing a new glass product for picture frames. The idea was simple: protons in the glass would let more light through, creating a crisper picture. But because the product was more expensive, the only market was museums.

At the funeral, someone was asking Feike why the innovation failed. The man explained: “If you apply those coatings on solar panels, do all the photons then go through and do you get a higher yield?”

Feike stopped the funeral there and then, started testing it, and built a great business out of an anti-reflective coating for solar panels. As Feike told me: “Creating a different culture, a different setting to create serendipity for innovation was critical. There are numerous examples of these innovations in the company and we benefited from them.”

So, before putting together a corporate statement, think about how you can bridge the gap and turn poetic words into meaningful action. That is the definition of truly sustainable leadership.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices