In Leaders We Trust: How to Build and Inspire Trust in 2023 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

In Leaders We Trust: How to Build and Inspire Trust in 2023

Leadership StrategiesCareer AdviceLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryTeam Performance

Article

Kimberly Archer

January 16, 2023

5 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer AdviceLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryTeam Performance

Executive summary

Good leadership is about trust. Trust is foundational for an organization's ability to evolve, adapt, and, ultimately, thrive in times of change.

Close

Kimberly Archer

Washington DC

Good leadership is about trust. Trust is essential to success and is foundational for an organization to evolve, flex, pivot, adapt, and thrive in times of continuous change.

Consider this research by Paul J. Zak, a Professor at the Claremont Graduate University and author of The Trust Factor: The Science of Creating High-Performance Companies. He found that, compared with people at low-trust companies, people at high-trust companies report:

74% less stress and 29% more satisfaction with their lives.

106% more energy at work and 50% higher productivity.

13% fewer sick days and 40% less burnout.

Here we explore what trust means in the leadership context, why trust is at risk, and the important ways leaders can build trust for higher-performing and engaged teams in the year ahead.

The decline of trust

Trust doesn’t come easy and, right now, trust is on a downward spiral. Edelman’s 2023 Trust Barometer – which has tracked trust levels for more than 20 years – shows business is the only trusted institution, globally. Trust in the media and government, both once revered as beacons of trust, has eroded, with more than two-fifths of respondents saying media and government are sources of false or misleading information.

This “cycle of distrust” in government and media institutions has important trickle-down effects for business leaders. Employees and wider society are looking at those at the helm with new eyes. While business executives have historically been expected to lead their companies to new heights, they are now expected to do so in a manner that helps build a better, more sustainable world. They must now deliver not only on profit, but on societal impact for their employees, their customers, and wider society.

Notably, Edelman’s research showed that business leaders are a unifying force. While people see government officials, journalists, and the rich as divisive forces, their trust in business to be honest means they’re more likely to see CEOs as a positive force in society.

The four types of trust

Trust takes on various dimensions in the leadership context. It isn’t just about whether frontline employees trust those at the helm. It’s also about whether teams trust each other. And, critically, whether leaders trust themselves to get the job done.

Do teams trust their leader?
If they do, they are more likely to engage in the leader’s vision and apply their best thinking and efforts to deliver against it. This dimension of trust is particularly important during times of business transformation, where employee engagement and buy-in are often the difference between success and failure—and return on investment.

Do teams trust each other?
If teams operate in an environment of trust, they learn to have confidence in their ability and others, leading to a positive culture of cohesion and collaboration. On the flip side, when teams don’t trust each other, there’s a higher chance of infighting, duplication of efforts, credit-grabbing, and overall slower performance. This scenario is also linked to toxic culture.

Does the leader trust their teams?
The capacity to trust others enables leaders to align their teams around a common purpose, take risks, and communicate openly and honestly—the bedrock of high performance. Conversely, if leaders don’t trust their teams, they are more likely to micromanage and block innovation, creativity, and progress.

Does the leader trust in themselves?
When leaders score highly in this area, they tend to be more resilient. They stay the course in the face of setbacks and are less likely to dwell on mistakes. For them, bumps in the road create new learning experiences. This is a particularly important, but often overlooked, dimension of trust. When colleagues and teams see self-trust is missing, it prompts the question: “If they don’t believe, why should I?”

Common traits of trusted leaders

Unfortunately, there are no shortcuts to building trust. Trust can only be earned. And it takes time to build. Yet there are certain traits that leaders who inspire the confidence of their colleagues and teams possess that will help you as you begin to foster your own culture of trust.

A human-centered approach
Former Apple CEO Steve Jobs was a famous proponent of “bringing your whole self to work.” And it’s easy to see why: people always follow people. So, while the idea that leaders must always show courage and strength may have succeeded in the past, today’s employees expect their leaders to show other sides of their personalities, too.

Winning employees' trust will require you to develop softer skills, like authenticity, humility, honesty, and self-awareness, alongside the technical skills traditionally demanded in leadership roles. We know that adopting these skills does not always come easily. In one global survey, we found that only around 40% of C-suite leaders thought the senior-most leaders at their organization showed authenticity, empathy, or self-awareness. Even fewer said their senior leaders show humility or lead by example.

Showing humility
If the pandemic taught us anything, it is that the long-held myth that leaders should have all the answers is no longer relevant. When we looked at how leaders could navigate this crisis, we found that while it was important to honestly accept the gravity of the situation and communicate openly, leaders also needed to be humble enough to admit they didn’t have all the answers. When you do this, it not only gives you credibility, but also the opportunity to share an authentic vision that is both reassuring and realistic. In turn, employees and colleagues are more likely to believe that you are the right person to steady the ship and navigate a path forward.

Delivering on your promise
One of the most critical bedrocks of trust is the ability to do what you say you are going to do. Today, this is perhaps most acute in the shift towards sustainable business. As more companies commit to lofty net-zero goals, employees, consumers, and the media will be looking for clear evidence that leaders will not only talk the talk on sustainability but also walk the walk. In the absence of any global standard for ESG reporting, leaders are standing squarely on trust—trust that they will do the right thing and deliver on their promises. As you look to 2023, ensuring you have a clear roadmap for change to support your sustainability vision should be high on the priority list. After all, you can only lose trust once.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices