Organizations are increasingly looking for sustainable leaders. Are you? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Organizations are increasingly looking for sustainable leaders. Are you?

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSocial ImpactSustainability OfficersCEO SuccessionAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

May 18, 2023

6 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSocial ImpactSustainability OfficersCEO SuccessionAssessment and Benchmarking

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Over half of RRA’s role specifications now refer to sustainability. Here’s how companies are embedding sustainability into their hiring decisions.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

Sarah Galloway

London

Hans Reus

Amsterdam

Having the right leader—or leaders—at the helm can make the world of difference when it comes to meeting sustainability goals.

Effective sustainable leadership turns lofty aspirations into tangible achievements. It ensures the whole organization coalesces around a new vision and purpose, and is given the tools and resources they need to deliver against sustainability targets. Without it, good intentions become meaningless words.

The good news is that world-leading organizations are now awakening to this fact and are fast making sustainability a core requirement of incoming executives.

Since 2015, we’ve tracked how often the terms related to sustainability—such as ESG, circular economy and social value—appear in the position specifications that we create with clients, which set out the specific leadership skills and qualifications they are looking for in their next executive.

When we began tracking, only 9% of job specifications included sustainability-related terms. Fast forward to today, and the number now stands at 53%.

Here, we look at how organizations are infusing sustainability in their hiring decisions, changes RRA has made in how we advise clients in order to help them meet their sustainability objectives, and how you can find the executives you need to make progress on sustainability.

Small changes lead to big results

Position specifications typically contain three sections: a description of the company, a description of the role, and a description of the ideal candidate. When we first started tracking, almost all of the references to sustainability were in context of describing the company—colorful descriptions of the sustainability strategies and accomplishments that might attract senior talent who want to work for a sustainable employer.

It was clear our clients understood the value of sustainability in winning “the war for talent”, and many saw the even greater potential for sustainability to create value and reduce risk, ultimately improving the company’s bottom line. But this wasn’t translating to how they actually assessed and selected senior leaders—running the risk that their ambitions would fall flat without the necessary leadership to execute.

So in 2021, RRA set out to re-engineer how we advise clients in creating the position specification. Our default process now prompts clients to consider what types of skills and expertise an ideal candidate should possess in order to drive sustainability, just as we were already doing for such vital executive competencies as setting strategy, executing for results or leading teams. Clients can choose to exclude this sustainability section from their specifications, but our change made this an “opt-out” rather than “opt-in” decision.

As a result of this change, we saw a significant increase in how often clients were referencing sustainability in their position specifications. Importantly, most of this growth came from sections that describe the role requirements or ideal candidate. In other words, with minimal prompting from RRA, clients were now focusing on sustainability in the places where it really mattered.

Figure 1: Percentage of RRA position specifications including sustainability terms

Note: Specs often contain references in both the company and the role or candidate sections. As such the bars do no sum to the overall number.

This change exemplifies RRA delivering on its mission “to improve the way the world is led”. We saw clients struggling to deliver on their strategic and operational objectives related to sustainability, and changed the way we advise them in response.

How to find sustainable leaders

The systemic challenges the world faces today mean that sustainable leadership cannot be confined to a small minority; companies must instead cultivate sustainable leadership at all levels.

So, how can you find the executives you need to progress sustainability? What exactly should you be looking for? And how can you attract the right people to help accelerate your journey?

Here, we highlight four key steps that organizations can take to embed sustainability into hiring and succession practices, so you can bring your sustainability ambitions to fruition.

Understand the mindsets and skill sets to look for. Sustainability must be incorporated into the role description for every senior executive position. Through our work with the United Nations Global Compact, we were able to set out the specific traits leaders need to deliver tangible sustainability results (see Figure 2 below). Ultimately, it all starts with the mindset that sees commercial, social and environmental outcomes as inextricably
linked and positively correlated. This mindset must then be paired with a long-term vision, a multi-level systems view, the courage to disrupt business models, and a willingness to include a range of stakeholders when determining the company’s priorities.

Assess candidates against the ‘what,’ ‘how,’ and ‘why.’ Your focus on sustainability should flow through your entire interview, assessment, and selection processes. In our experience, there are three key factors to consider when reviewing candidates: their track record (what have they accomplished?); their competencies (how have they accomplished this?); and their mindset (why were they driven to accomplish this?) Naturally, you’ll want to go beyond a candidate’s own self-assessment to also include carefully selected references and psychometric testing.

Be honest about your sustainability journey. Finding the right candidate starts with being honest about the organization’s hiring needs. To attract the right people at the right time, be clear about where your organization is on its sustainability journey—whether it is nascent, evolving, or already well integrated—and how sustainability is embedded into the objectives of the company as a whole and each business unit or function. Be clear about how the successful candidate will contribute to achieving these objectives, and how they will be expected to embed sustainability KPIs into their daily work.

Prime your internal pipelines. Don’t overlook the need to build your bench of next-generation sustainable leaders—those sitting a few rungs below the C-suite who will one day build on and accelerate the progress you’ve made today. When identifying your internal pipelines, it’s important to not get overly hung-up on sustainability experience. It’s more important to find people who have the right level of passion and commitment, and then invest in their growth and development, exposing them to the crucible experiences that will allow them to develop their sustainability muscles.

Figure 2: RRA’s Model of the Sustainable Leader

Authors

Kurt Harrison, co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice. He is based in New York.

Sarah Galloway co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice. She is based in London.

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Sustainability Knowledge teams. She is based in Portland.

Hans Reus is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice. He is based in Amsterdam.

Contact our sustainable leadership experts

Sarah Galloway

London

Kurt Harrison

New York

Hans Reus

Amsterdam

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices