Get to grips with sustainability | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Looking to Catapult to the C-Suite? Get to Grips with Sustainability

Sustainable LeadershipCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability OfficersDevelopment and TransitionBoard Effectiveness

Article

Clarke Murphy

February 03, 2023

6 min

Sustainable LeadershipCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability OfficersDevelopment and TransitionBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

To accelerate your career in today’s world, understanding what it means to be a sustainable leader is key.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

Sustainability is now one of the most pressing issues on the CEO agenda today. Employees, investors, customers, and communities are looking for business leaders to pivot their organizations to a more sustainable future.

There’s just one problem: Many are struggling to know where and how to start.

The truth is, sustainability transformation is hard. And there is no pre-existing playbook to fall back on. At business school, they learned to deliver results for shareholders, not stakeholders. And it doesn’t matter how much experience they have, many are just beginning their sustainability education. It is almost as though they are associates again.

This opens a big opportunity for those starting their careers today. We know that the most-enlightened CEOs are looking to their next-generation leaders for answers. For example, Dolf van der Brink, Heineken’s CEO and Chairman, actively looks for rising stars who have strong sustainability credentials and catapults them into positions of leadership and responsibility.

Soon after he became CEO, Blanca Brambila Perez secured the role of Global Head of Circularity at the company’s Amsterdam headquarters. She had previously been Head of Sustainability for Heineken Mexico, which includes the brewer’s largest and most sustainable production facility.

In part due to Blanca’s advocacy, Heineken Mexico became the model for water care globally, participating in international forums that share good practices and knowledge with all the other Heineken breweries. Under Blanca’s guidance, the Mexican operations reduced their water footprint as much as possible, ultimately offsetting more than 2.4 million cubic meters of water in the Monterrey, Toluca, Guadalajara, and Tecate plants. Beyond saving water, Heineken Mexico contributed to local ecosystems by improving the quality of residual water returned to the environment, which balanced and restored habitats to their original state. The success of these initiatives caught Dolf’s eye.

Under Dolf’s leadership, Heineken also takes part in the international Nudge Global Challenge, an annual sustainability initiative open to employees under the age of 30. Dolf sees it as a chance to not only identify the next generation of sustainable leaders but also to gain insights on potential sustainability practices and innovations from executive and management-track employees with direct experience at all levels of the supply chain.

So, even if you’re at the beginning of your career, know that by grasping the sustainability agenda, you will become a powerful force for change who inspires your CEO and other senior executives to do better while accelerating your career and catapulting yourself into leadership positions.

What does it take to seize the sustainability opportunity?

Recently, Russell Reynolds Associates partnered with the United Nations Global Compact to develop a sustainable leadership model that sets out the specific skills you’ll need to move the dial on sustainability.

It starts with having the right mindset. The world’s most successful sustainable leaders all have one thing in common: they share a deep-seated belief that the role of business is not just to make money, but to also be a force for good in the world. Keeping this idea front of mind is what will inspire (and motivate) you to see opportunities to do business differently.

Beyond this, there are four key capabilities:

1. Multi-level systems thinking

Sustainability is a complex space. But sustainable leaders can see how the entire environmental, societal, and business ecosystem fits together and navigate a path forward. It’s all about raising your hand for experiences that will stretch your thinking. For example, our research shows that many leaders who have gone on to make huge strides in sustainability have international experience and/or cross-functional experience, which gave them a broader perspective on their business and industry. (Notably, many had experience in supply chain and operations, where they could see the direct impact of their sustainability strategies.)

2. Disruptive innovation

Sustainable leaders look for opportunities to disrupt the status quo and commit to bold action without necessarily knowing the exact solution—or how they will get there. They lead with the determination that whatever piece of the puzzle is missing, they will find it. And they recognize that the greater risk is taking no action at all. But remember that this is not about recklessness. To take calculated risks, you need to first zoom in to investigate issues in detail (analyze, research, and seek out the best available science) and then zoom out, so you never lose your passion for the big picture. Get good data through experiments and pilots, then act. Don’t spend months or years trying to prove your solution is perfect before sharing your ideas.

3. Stakeholder inclusion

Sustainability is too big a problem for any one person or entity to solve. The best sustainable leaders recognize that they must work with others to find the answers, from other employees and departments to customers, suppliers, shareholders—and even competitors. Every conversation you have internally and externally with these stakeholders is an opportunity to gain invaluable new insights. Beyond this, joining industry forums can help you understand the movers and shakers in the sustainability space, discover new perspectives on problems, and spark ideas for collaboration. But most of all, adopt a cooperative mindset (become a collaborator in chief), recognizing that only by working with others will you be able to turn your fledgling ideas into workable solutions—and secure the buy-in you need if you’re to deliver them.

4. Long-term activation

Sustainability is a marathon, not a sprint, and the winners are those who think not just five to 10 years ahead, but generations ahead. This is about having the vision, courage, and grit to push ahead with your plans in the face of resistance or setbacks. So, when thinking about sustainability, don’t just focus on the tactical low-hanging fruit. Think about how your organization can make a difference for the long haul—and push your senior managers to do the same. Develop your resilience. Not everyone will agree with your vision (nor should they). But you need to learn when to stay the course, and when to tweak, bend, or yield.

The good news is that you don’t need to be a born believer in sustainability to develop these skills. Our research shows that only 45% of sustainable leaders had a passion for environmental or social issues from an early age. Instead, many were convinced (43%) about the strategic importance of sustainability as they grew in their careers. (The remaining 12% were awoken to sustainability by a pivotal moment of realization, prompted by a major event or experience.)

So, next time your company is discussing sustainability, raise your hand to get involved. And, if no one is talking about it, grab the chance to put it on the radar of your management teams. It might be the single biggest thing you can do for your career.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsLeadership StrategiesCulture RiskDevelopment and Transition

What Aspiring C-suite Leaders Need to Know About “Being Available”

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices