The EBITDA of Decarbonization | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The EBITDA of Decarbonization

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCareer TransitionsEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipSustainability OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Article

March 24, 2023

9 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCareer TransitionsEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipSustainability OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

Next generation supply chain leaders are seizing the opportunities provided by climate change and decarbonization.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Climate change, and energy transition that is being driven by it, is both the greatest challenge and the greatest opportunity of our lifetime. The implementation of this energy transition will require nothing short of the decarbonization of the global economy. The incredible scale and breadth of this effort will offer companies an unprecedented opportunity to drive a sustainable business transformation that will not only address their emissions footprint but also lower costs and improve returns on investment, directly benefitting their bottom line.

To capture these opportunities, organizations need to decarbonize their supply chains. This is where the most significant investments – and gains – will be made. Decarbonizing global supply chains is estimated to take over $100 trillion by 2050, with half of this investment coming from large enterprises and half from small and medium-sized firms (Figure 1). But supply chains will not decarbonize themselves; for companies to successfully integrate sustainability across their business model, they need to shift their focus and be early movers on investing in decarbonization talent. Hiring, retaining, and upskilling talent will be crucial for those that want to achieve net zero that leads to value creation and can fuel long-term revenue and EBITDA growth.

Figure 1: Cost of net zero by 2050

Source: BCG and HSBC, Delivering Net Zero Supply Chains: The Multi-Trillion Dollar Key to Beat Climate Change. https://www.hsbc.com/insight/topics/seven-steps-to-tackle-a-usd50-trillion-challenge, October 27 2021.

Reducing Scope 3 emissions: A crucial priority for organizations aiming to achieve their targets

While more than 4,000 businesses and financial institutions are already working to reduce their emissions in line with a science-based target,1  the operational challenges of achieving this are just starting to become apparent. The strategic business transformation needed to reach net-zero requires outcome-oriented roadmaps that identify greenhouse gas emission (GHG) hotspots. For most companies, the largest source of risk and opportunity are Scope 3 emissions, which include upstream and downstream emissions that span across a company’s value chain. These emissions represent over 90% of most organizations’ total GHG emissions.2

Scope 3 emissions can only be reduced through collaboration with customers and suppliers. Despite numerous challenges, many companies are already producing detailed decarbonization and transition plans. However, broader commitments are needed: less than one-third of the world’s 2,000 largest public companies have a GHG emissions reduction target that includes all or part of their scope 3 emissions. Predictably, this percentage varies across countries—in the US, 30% of organizations have committed to reductions, while 66% of companies in France and 57% in the UK have made similar commitments.3

Decarbonization in action: How three companies are creating value by reducing emissions

Estimates… suggest that savings [from decarbonization] in materials alone could exceed $1 trillion a year by 2025, while potentially creating more jobs and innovation. Chief supply chain officers like myself spend the majority of our time at this convergence of supply, cost savings, talent development, and competitive differentiation.” 4

- Kevin Brown
Chief supply chain officer, Dell

Effective global leaders view decarbonization as a value-creation strategy through which they can increase their operational efficiency and cost competitiveness. Many companies are driving decarbonization of their own operations and supply chains, investing in renewable energy infrastructure and electric mobility. But for best-in-class organizations, decarbonization initiatives are already core to their business strategy.

Philips uses an Environmental Profit & Loss (EP&L) account for insights into main environmental hotspots and innovation areas to reduce the environmental impact of their products and solutions. Green/EcoDesigned products and solutions generated nearly 72% of Philips’s revenues in 2022, up from 2021.5

Schneider Electric has launched the Zero Carbon Project, which aims to lower the carbon footprint of its supply chain by partnering with its top 1,000 suppliers.6  At the same time, Schneider is leveraging learnings from its own decarbonization efforts to drive new revenue streams, with their sustainability business having grown +20% in Q4 2022.7

Dow Chemical has valued their total addressable market opportunity at more than $800 billion as they seek to expand their market verticals to deliver solutions designed for recyclability, enhanced plastics circularity and sustainability for key markets.8

Operations and supply chain: the natural home for decarbonization efforts

The business case is clear: best-in-class organizations are making progress, but decarbonization of the global economy requires prioritization of Scope 3 emissions at scale. Companies today still focus most of their efforts on 10% of their emissions, while supply chains are responsible for almost all of their negative climate impact.

To achieve net zero targets and returns on related investments, operations and supply chains must become the priority. These organizational functions need to take a more central role in their organization’s sustainability journey, most notably in companies where manufacturing and supply chains are core to the business. While some organizations have decided that operations and supply chain should lead the charge, sustainability often still sits with the legal and regulatory, finance or separate ESG function (Figure 2). A 2022 Russell Reynolds’ study found that only 19% of surveyed organizations give operations and supply chain ownership of sustainability. However, when we asked finance executives which function they should partner with in order to drive impact in ESG efforts, 77% chose operations and supply chain.

Figure 2. Who owns ESG & Sustainability in your organization? (Select all that apply)

Source: RRA survey ‘The Evolving Role of Finance: ESG & Sustainability’, n = 113, 2022

Companies at the forefront of decarbonization are experimenting with different supply chain leadership enablement models. It’s no coincidence that each of these companies below are also featured on Gartner’s Supply Chain Top 25, with many having appeared for several consecutive years.9 These companies are willing to push boundaries to innovate their approach to supply chain management and, in doing so, are providing a roadmap for other companies seeking to replicate their success.

At Schneider Electric, the supply chain function leads the execution of the decarbonization strategy, and the supply chain leader serves on the Group Sustainability Committee.10 Furthermore, the chief supply chain officer is part of the C-suite and reports directly to the CEO – a governance model that will benefit the firm’s sustainability strategy.11

[Learning about circular economies] opened my eyes to the possibilities around how we could make this – not a ‘do good for the world’ program – but something that is actually essential to the sustainability of our company.” 13

- John Kern
SVP of supply chain operations, Cisco

At Cisco Systems, John Kern, the SVP of supply chain operations is the executive sponsor of the company’s Circular Economy initiative, which seeks to embed circularity across the product lifecycle.12 After realizing that each function was working in isolation and with different orientations towards the company’s circular economy goals, Cisco assembled the Executive Change Network made of up top executives from across the business to co-create solutions to the circular economy challenges.13

At Johnson & Johnson, chief sustainability officer Paulette Frank is a member of the Supply Chain Leadership Team and is a direct report to chief global supply chain officer Kathy Wengel. This integration of sustainability into the supply chain reporting structure enables Frank to partner directly with suppliers to reduce upstream carbon emissions, in support of the company’s transition to 100% renewable electricity and carbon neutral operations.14

At Microsoft, corporate vice president and chief sustainability officer Melanie Nakagawa works closely with her supply chain peer Donna Wharton, corporate vice president for supply chain and sustainability. Nakagawa’s policy and strategy development expertise are complemented by Wharton’s deep expertise in supply chain and process engineering in service of meeting Microsoft’s ambitious goal to be carbon negative by 2030.15

Leading the way in decarbonization: the model of the sustainable leader

Even though it’s best practice, companies that place sustainability strategy management within operations and supply chain may encounter a different challenge: key talent shortages. According to a report from LinkedIn, “green talent” in the global workforce has grown at roughly 6% per year between 2016 and 2021, while concurrently job postings requiring those skills grew at 8% annually.16 To make this supply and demand mismatch even more challenging for industry, consulting and other professional services firms are hiring sustainability talent in volumes, shrinking the talent pool further for others and increasing market rates for these skills.

At Russell Reynolds, we believe that a mix of hard and soft skills are needed to achieve sustainability targets. Our analysis revealed four critical attributes that differentiate sustainable leaders, underpinned by the most important leadership quality: a “sustainable mindset.” (Figure 3) The sustainable mindset is the purpose driven belief that business is not a commercial activity divorced from the wider societal and environmental context in which it operates. Skills can be trained and complemented by the right team, but having an orientation towards sustainability that enables the leader to assess opportunities and risks through the lens of sustainability and decarbonization is even more critical. Whether the leader is an internal promotion or an external hire, an assessment of the candidate for these qualities is essential.

Figure 3:  Russell Reynolds Associates’ Model of the Sustainable Leader

Source: Leadership for the Decade of Action: UN Global Compact-Russell Reynolds Associates study on the characteristics of sustainable business leaders, 2020.

Recommendations for companies and leaders seeking to decarbonize:

Recognize and champion decarbonization’s value creation opportunities: The most successful companies recognize that decarbonization is becoming essential to maintaining their social license to operate and leads to value creation when treated as a strategic priority. Successful implementation requires the right talent and then developing and training them in ways that support the decarbonization strategy. Furthermore, leaders must ensure their current organizational structure is appropriate for the strategy and align rewards to support its implementation.

Enable cross-functional collaboration to support solution co-creation: Operations and supply chain are the natural home for leadership and execution of decarbonization, but desired outcomes can only be achieved through collaboration. Ensuring you have an organizational structure and culture that encourages cross-functional collaboration and co-creation of decarbonization strategies is essential. Leaders must establish strong relationships within the function, across the organization, and outside the organization. They need to effectively navigate organizational complexity to collaborate successfully within a matrixed environment, and be comfortable with being the “external face” of the function.

Assess, identify and develop your organization’s sustainable leaders: The transition to a net-zero reality will require disruptive innovation, inclusive leadership, a multi-level systems approach, and the courage to stay the course in the face of setbacks. Assessing, identifying, and developing these qualities in both current and next-generation leaders will be critical to ensuring companies have the sufficient bench of talent needed to navigate the challenges – and reap the rewards – of decarbonization.

Authors

Kurt Harrison co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Sustainability Practice. He is based in New York.
Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.
Mika Nurminen leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers Knowledge team. He is based in Toronto.
Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Operations & Supply Chain Officers Practice. He is based in Dallas.
Sylwia Zieba leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Research team. She is based in New York.

References

1 Science Based Targets. Captured January 3rd, 2023. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/companies-taking-action
2 US Environmental Protection Agency. January 17, 2023. Supply Chain Guidance. US Environmental Protection Agency. January 17, 2023. Supply Chain Guidance. https://www.epa.gov/climateleadership/supply-chain-guidance
3 Net Zero Tracker. Captured January 27, 2023. https://zerotracker.net/
4 Sean Ashcroft. March 16, 2022. Dell supply chief Kevin Brown has sustainability in sights. Supply Chain Digital. https://supplychaindigital.com/sustainability/dell-supply-chief-kevin-brown-has-sustainability-in-sights
5 Philips. February 21, 2023. Annual Report 2022. https://www.results.philips.com/downloadcenter#ar21
6 Schneider Electric. June 15, 2021. Schneider Electric named as Best Global Sustainable Supply Chain Organization spearheading climate action throughout its ecosystem. https://www.se.com/ww/en/about-us/newsroom/news/press-releases/schneider-electric-named-as-best-global-sustainable-supply-chain-organization-spearheading-climate-action-throughout-its-ecosystem-60c8994c244643554f295a44
7 Schneider Electric. February 16, 2023. Full Year 2022 Results. https://www.se.com/ww/en/assets/564/document/378891/release-fy-results-2022.pdf
8 The Dow Chemical Company. June 15, 2022. 2021 Environmental, Social & Governance report. https://corporate.dow.com/content/dam/corp/documents/about/066-00397-01-2021-esg-report.pdf
9 Mike Griswold. May 26, 2022. The Gartner Supply Chain Top 25 for 2022. Gartner. https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/the-gartner-supply-chain-top-25-for-2022
10 Laura Cohn. April 25, 2022. Does Your Organization Need a Chief Sustainability Officer? Gartner. https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/does-your-organization-need-a-chief-sustainability officer#:~:text=The%20leader%20of%20the%20supply%20chain%20function%20is,ESG%20and%20sustainability%20leaders%20%E2%80%94%20work%20closely%20together
11 Mourad Tamoud. December 13, 2022. Remaking the role of Chief Supply Chain Officer. Schneider Electric. https://blog.se.com/supply-chain/2022/12/13/remaking-the-role-of-chief-supply-chain-officer/
12 Cisco. Executive Biography – John Kern. https://newsroom.cisco.com/c/r/newsroom/en/us/executives/kern-john.html
13 GreenBiz. December 2, 2019. John Kern on driving Cisco's circular economy efforts forward. https://www.greenbiz.com/video/john-kern-driving-ciscos-circular-economy-efforts-forward
14 Johnson & Johnson. Our Approach to Climate Action. https://www.jnj.com/environmental-sustainability/climate-and-energy-action%20/ ; Johnson & Johnson. About: Paulette Frank. https://theorg.com/org/johnson-johnson/org-chart/paulette-frank
15 Microsoft. April 21, 2022. 2021 Environmental Sustainability Report. https://query.prod.cms.rt.microsoft.com/cms/api/am/binary/RE4RwfV
16 LinkedIn. February 22, 2022. Our 2022 Global Green Skills Report. https://news.linkedin.com/2022/february/our-2022-global-green-skills-report

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices