The Trust Currency: What Makes Successful Family Business CFOs | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Trust Currency: What Makes Successful Family Business CFOs

LeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Article

January 06, 2023

6 min

LeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Executive summary

As Asian family businesses pivot and scale in size and complexity, partnering with a CFO who can serve as a trusted steward is crucial.

Close

Sanjay Kapoor

New Delhi
Mumbai

Vinita Katara

Mumbai
New Delhi

Family owned businesses in Asia are highly selective when hiring external CFO talent, while prospective talent is often cautious of working for a family business. The resulting dynamics make recruiting external CFOs for family businesses a challenging task.

Based on our experience of trying to resolve this paradox and interviews with successful family business CFOs in Asia Pacific, Russell Reynolds Associates examined the unique operating context of Asian family businesses and key competencies that make successful family business CFOs.

Asian family businesses face a conundrum when hiring external CFO talent

At the inception of founder-led businesses, financial oversight is either managed by the founder or, if they are fortunate, by a trusted advisor with a finance background who worked closely with the founder during the early years. As family businesses begin to scale, often with multiple generations involved and sometimes with private equity in the picture as well, they sometimes outgrow the founder’s finance confidant’s capabilities. This necessitates an external search for a qualified finance leader.

However, many family businesses struggle to find someone who can provide an impartial lens while maintaining the founder’s trust. On the other hand, many CFOs are wary of joining family businesses, as they have concerns about the level of professionalism and independence, and are unsure of their ability to make a difference.

To help develop a roadmap to solve this challenge and simplify the hiring process, we analyzed 59 of the largest Indian and Southeast Asian companies from the world’s top 750 family businesses,i and conducted interviews with current and past CFOs at several successful family businesses. Our goal was to gain insights on what makes an Asian family business CFO successful and identify their differentiating characteristics.

The unique operating context of Asian family businesses

There are critical distinctions between operating cultures at multinational corporations and family businesses that need to be kept in mind while selecting a CFO. In fact, some of the operating differences can be quite attractive for certain candidates. These differences include:

Figure 1. A comparison of multinational corporation and family business environments that impact the CFO role

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates APAC Family Business Analysis

CFOs are attracted to the family business environment because of the potential autonomy it affords them; the challenge of navigating a complex, family matrix; and the opportunity to have an end-to end impact on the organization. Although the personal risks and accountability may be higher, CFOs who choose to work in family businesses are keen to lead transformational, impactful work in this high-velocity, less bureaucratic environment. These outcomes can be extremely compelling from a business impact standpoint and, more importantly, from a personal rewards perspective.

Family business CFO: Five key competencies with “Trust as the Centerpiece”

Our research surfaced five key competencies that made CFOs successful in Asian family businesses, all of which center around trust:

Figure 2. Five key competencies of successful family business CFOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates APAC Family Business Analysis

1. A trusted partner in value creation.

As family businesses progress and grow beyond geographies, the CFO becomes an increasingly valuable partner who can influence the business’ direction and, by extension, its valuation. CFOs are expected to create a proposition that simultaneously prioritizes the family’s capital allocation while also addressing changing market needs to scale the business. Best-in-class CFOs proactively translate innovative learnings from previous experiences into the family business context. CFOs who can operate with agility outside of “textbook methods” become especially valuable as next-generation executives join the ranks, pivoting to new business models, establishing best-in-class leadership practices, and increasing technological capabilities. Within this mix of professional and entrepreneurial environments, the CFO plays a key role in guiding the business’ risk management strategy, ensuring that growth is value accretive, while serving as a trusted advisor and providing the necessary balance for family leadership.

2. Diplomacy in managing family involvement while bridging various stakeholders.

Family involvement in the business can vary widely depending on the business and family context and CFOs need to be discerning about balancing contrasting viewpoints. In addition, although the founder’s family typically has the strongest influence over the organization, as it is interested in passing a successful business down to future generations, there may be a diverse range of stakeholders, including the board and investors. The CFO is critical in carrying along all stakeholders, bringing a structured view, enhanced governance, and deeper financial management discipline, while still maintaining the family’s position of strength. To do so, it is important for the CFO to be resilient in the face of difficult conversations, judicious when it comes to key business decisions, and diplomatic in all interactions.

3. Invisible leadership.

The family business CFO needs to be discerning around when to seek attention, when to share the limelight, and when to work quietly behind the scenes. Often, the CFO might not receive public recognition, due to sensitive family relationships and perceptions that may need to be created in this business construct. At times, the direction may change after private conversations or influence from certain family members. CFOs need to pivot without drawing unwanted attention to the change. Through it all, it is important that the CFO operates with a low ego and humility, always putting the family and the business first.

4. Navigating the global stage.

As family businesses become increasingly global, Asia is no longer the only playing field. There is an increasing demand for CFOs who can position the business on a bigger stage. CFOs with international experience are being increasingly valued by family businesses, as they bring world-class financial and technical competencies and a broader set of interpersonal skills, including nuanced cultural understanding and innovative cross-collaboration. Such CFOs can also anticipate and strategize around global markets’ impact on the business.

5. Investing in the next generation.

The most successful Asian family business CFOs not only bring their functional competencies to the table, but they also leverage their rich professional experiences to train the next-generation pipeline. The most trusted CFOs are not only respected by and relied on by next-generation leaders to define and create the business’ future value proposition, but founders also rely on them to equip their children with the right capabilities to eventually lead the business.

Summary

Family businesses in the Asia-Pacific region are undergoing continuous shifts, such as focusing on leadership succession, developing the next generation, partnering more with private equity, and leading the way in sustainability (see our recent research on Asian Family Businessesii). As Asian family businesses pivot and scale in size and complexity, partnering with a CFO who can serve as a trusted steward—someone who can co-create value, bring an entrepreneurial mindset, demonstrate egoless leadership as they build a professional finance function, while balancing complex stakeholder dynamics—is crucial in building a currency of trust that runs through the veins of family businesses.

The Trust Currency: What Makes Successful Family Business CFOs

READ THE FULL REPORT HERE

References

i Family Capital. (2022). The World’s Top 750 Family Businesses Ranking. Retrieved from Family Capital: https://www.famcap.com/the-worlds-750-biggest-family-businesses/

ii Russell Reynolds Associates. (2021, September 30). Asian Family Businesses. Retrieved from Russell Reynolds Associates: https://www.russellreynolds.com/en/insights/articles/asian-family-businesses

Authors

Sanjay Kapoor is a member of Russell Reynolds’ Industrial and Natural Resources sector. He is based in India.

Vinita Katara is a member of Russell Reynolds’ Corporate Officers capability. She is based in India.

Anupama Puranik is a member of Russell Reynolds’ Healthcare sector. She is based in Singapore.

Sharon Tan is a member of Russell Reynolds’ Private Capital and Family Business capabilities knowledge team. She is based in Singapore.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices