Holding Executives Accountable: Tying Financial Metrics to Sustainability Outcomes | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Holding Executives Accountable: Tying Financial Metrics to Sustainability Outcomes

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability Officers

Article

February 09, 2023

3 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability Officers

Executive Summary

CEOs must set clear and actionable sustainability outcome metrics and hold executives accountable for their success. Here's how.

Close

While few executives overall tie their compensation to sustainability outcomes and goals, those who do are more likely to view sustainability as a value creation opportunity.

Companies are increasingly responsible for identifying, executing, and communicating sustainability related goals. From 2021 to 2022, there has been an increase from 10% to 17% of executives who stated their compensation is in part tied to their impact on ESG (environmental, social, and governance) goals and metrics. While this is a 70% increase overall and a step in the right direction, there is still much more progress needed to be made in integrating accountability for sustainability goals.

One aspect of successful integration and execution of sustainability strategy is setting clear and actionable metrics to hold executives accountable for their success. This can be achieved several ways, including tying compensation, bonuses, and performance appraisal criteria for C-suite leaders to sustainability metric accomplishment.

In this three-article series ‘Commitment to Sustainability’, we delve into research from the Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2021-2022 Global Leadership Monitor and 2021 Divides and Dividends to help organizations in different geographic regions and industries build and maintain effective sustainability strategies for the future.

Ultimately, executives need to fully grasp three key areas when setting sustainability goals and metrics. Read on below to learn about holding executives accountable by tying financial metrics to sustainability outcomes, or navigate to our other articles in the series:

1. How CEO commitment affects sustainability integration

2.	Framing sustainability through a value creation lens

3.	Holding executives accountable: tying financial metrics to sustainability outcomes

Compensation by sustainability driver

Leaders whose compensation is tied to sustainability goals selected value creation as their primary sustainability driver 45% of the time; higher than the global total of 30% and those without compensation tied to sustainability goals (28%).

My compensation is in part tied to my impact on ESG goals

By Sustainability Driver

Global view: Commitment through accountability—tying sustainability to leaders’ compensation

CEO commitment and strategy are key pieces of the puzzle when it comes to embedding sustainability across the business. And tying executive compensation to sustainability goals is another way for organizations to showcase their commitment. Although only 17% of executives globally said their compensation is in part tied to their impact on ESG goals or metrics in 2022, this is a 70% increase over 2021, which speaks to the increasing pressure organizations are under to set and stick to clear metrics on sustainability goals.

Compensation tied to diversity, equity, and inclusion also rose by 21% from 2021 to 2022, indicating a heightening prioritization of diversity and sustainability in organizations, though more progress is needed in both areas.

Which of the following statements apply to you?

Regional view: UK China/Hong Kong are most likely to tie compensation to sustainability outcomes

Executives in the United Kingdom, China/Hong Kong, Australia and Germany are more likely to tie compensation to sustainability outcomes, and these numbers have risen sharply since 2021: 4x in China/Hong Kong, 3x in the United Kingdom, and 2x in Germany, all much more than the global rise of 70% from 2021 to 2022. Executives in the United States are the least likely to have their compensation tied to sustainability goals at just 13%.

Compensation tied to sustainability outcomes is low among all levels of executives, although slightly more common among C-level executives than the CEO or next-generation leaders.  This indicates that not one person owns sustainability, but it should be the responsibility of the board of directors, CEO, C-suite, and head of sustainability collaboratively to thrive.

My compensation is in part tied to my impact on ESG goals

By Country

Industry view: Industrial companies are most likely to tie compensation to sustainability outcomes

Relatively few executives have their compensation tied to sustainability goals across industries. However, industrial companies are the standout, where 38% of executives say this is the case—almost twice what is reported in other industries. This metric has risen from 2021 to 2022 for every region, industry, and role level except in the professional services industry and for CEOs. It rose in the financial services (3x YOY) and healthcare (2.5x) industries the most.

The consumer industry ranks the second highest in terms of CEO commitment to sustainability, but only 19% of leaders have compensation tied to ESG goals, indicating a need to create actionable metrics to hold executives accountable to publicly expressed commitments.

My compensation is in part tied to my impact on ESG goals
By Industry

Turning these insights into action

Tie compensation to sustainability outcomes

Measure and incentivize adoption of sustainability as a core goal and metric by tying it to compensation outcomes for leaders.

It's time to walk the walk: with such a high level of CEO commitment reported globally, organizations are well poised to take concrete action and improving motivation to  reaching sustainability goals.

Improve accountability for reaching sustainability targets at all levels by tying compensation to sustainability outcomes. Ensure clear expectations for reaching targets in terms of scope and duration.

Commitment to Sustainability Series

How CEO Commitment Affects Sustainability Integration

Find out more

Commitment to Sustainability Series

Framing Sustainability Through the Value Creation Lens

Find out more

Methodology

2021/2022 Global Leadership Monitor
The Global Leadership Monitor is an annual online survey of executives and non-executives. The Global Leadership Monitor tracks key threats to organizational health and leadership preparedness to face them, as well as indicators of confidence in leadership, and leaders' engagement and career aspirations.

All data has been weighted by GDP to create a more representative share of business contribution from each market. Not all percentages in charts add up to 100% as a result of rounding percentages and the decision in certain cases to exclude the display of certain sectors and “neither/nor,” “unsure,” “other,” “none of the above,” and “don’t know” responses.

Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed our global network of executives using an online/mobile survey in February and March of 2021, and in March of 2022.

2021 Divides and Dividends Research
The study was conducted with 9,500 employees and next-generation leaders in 11 growth and mature markets from April 16 to May 12, 2021.

Authors

Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.
Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.
Gabrielle Lieberman is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.

Acknowledgments

Francesco Menonna is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ industrial/natural resources team. He is based in New York.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices