Navigating the Generative AI Revolution: Five Key Focus Areas for Leading into the Future | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Navigating the Generative AI Revolution: Five Key Focus Areas for Leading into the Future

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationLeadershipArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersBoard Effectiveness

Article

August 21, 2023

3 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationLeadershipArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersBoard Effectiveness

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

When implementing generative AI, consider its impacts on culture, leadership, organization model, commercial strategy, and risk management.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Tristan Jervis

London

Generative AI refers to artificial intelligence that enables users to quickly generate new content based on a variety of inputs. Inputs and outputs to these models can include text, images, sounds, animation, 3D models, or other types of data.

The introduction of ChatGPT and subsequent surge in interest around large language models (LLMs) and generative AI has thrust technology conversation into the spotlight for both boards and leaders. While AI adoption to date has varied among organizations, generative AI has brought the barrier of AI adoption to an extraordinarily reachable place. Organizations, regardless of their size and industry, are actively exploring various use cases and leveraging AI's potential to gain a competitive edge.

As with any epochal transformation, generative AI’s emergence also brings major potential consequences. To seize opportunities and avoid the corresponding pitfalls, Russell Reynolds Associates identified five key areas to help CEOs, boards, and senior technology leaders navigate the impact of generative AI on their organizations:

Talent and culture      Leadership       Organizational structure       Commercial strategies     Risk management

Talent and culture: investing in a transformative AI mindset

AI has the potential to revolutionize the talent landscape. Roles may be eliminated, enhanced, or newly created due to this new paradigm. In fact, Goldman Sachs estimates that two-thirds of current jobs in the U.S. and Europe could be affected by generative AI.1 But while there's been considerable concern about the number of jobs generative AI might eliminate, many organizations are taking a more nuanced approach.

Rather than eliminating specific functions, a "cost out, value in" philosophy has led many organizations to repurpose certain groups to areas where they can make a bigger impact. Additionally, AI’s streamlining abilities are prompting firms to consider how the technology might free up executives' time to focus on higher-value tasks. Moreover, the adoption of generative AI will elevate the importance of architecture, data science, AI ethics, and risk management roles to support AI implementation and utilization.

As a result, organizations are reevaluating their AI adoption levels, exploring available third-party tools and integration possibilities, and strategically positioning themselves for future success. Crucially, they are also facing the mammoth task of upskilling their entire workforce to meet the demands of the AI-driven future.

With rapid change comes disruption. From a talent perspective, this may lead to resistance towards AI, rather than viewing it as a tool for enablement. As organizations grow increasingly technology-oriented, leaders can cultivate a culture of innovation and transformation by establishing two seemingly conflicting approaches:

A test-and-learn mindset that allows for quick iterations and first-mover advantages

A slower, deliberate approach to integrating AI into existing processes

Both mindsets are crucial as organizations embrace the core tenants of transformation, which include:

Systems thinking, empathy, curiosity, versatility, adaptability, continuous learning

Industry leaders have already embraced top AI talent. In 2018, JPMorgan recruited Manuela Veloso, former head of the machine learning department at Carnegie Mellon University, to lead its AI research. Since then, JPMorgan has recruited other AI experts to strengthen its data infrastructure and support machine learning capabilities. As of June 2023, the bank ranks #1 in the Evident AI Index—the first global standard benchmark of AI maturity for the banking sector.

Key talent and culture questions to consider:

• Is there a sufficient level of AI understanding at the right levels of the organization?

• Which roles on our leadership team will experience the greatest impact due to the introduction of generative AI?

• What skills should we develop to gain a competitive advantage from AI?

• Have we cultivated a culture of innovation and transformation? If so, how can we foster its continued growth?

Back to menu

Leadership: choosing the right person to lead the AI charge

While culture and talent strategy is fundamental to an organization’s AI strategy, determining who will lead the transformation—and how they’ll do it—is crucial to success.

In some cases, organizations might opt for a chief AI officer (CAIO). Similar to the boon of chief digital officers (CDO) who led the 2010s digital transformations, the CAIO can bridge the gap between business objectives, customer engagement, and technology. Alternatively, chief data & analytics officers may be elevated to the leadership team, as their roles become more comprehensive and transformative, with direct responsibility for driving top-line growth. In other cases, organizations may incorporate AI efforts under the existing top technology officer, such as the CIO, CTO, or CDO. This convergent model has the appeal of bringing a consolidated strategic view across all of technology, data analytics, and AI to the executive leadership team.

Boards also bring valuable insights to strategic decisions concerning technology adoption, innovation, and competitive positioning. Over the past five years, more non-executive boards have brought in technology experts, originally favoring GMs from the tech industry, while more recently seeking out functional technology experts and specific leaders in cyber security, data, or AI, with the latter examples including:

Fei-Fei Li: Board member at Twitter, Sequoia Professor of Computer Science, and former Chief Scientist of AI/ML for Google

Bill Stasior: Board member at Avellino Lab, former Corporate Vice President of Technology for Microsoft, and former VP of AI/Siri for Apple

Richard Benjamins: Board member at CDP-Europe, Chief Responsible AI Officer at Telefonica

Xiaoqun Clever: Board member at BHP, Amadeus, and Infineon Technologies, formerly holding the positions of Chief Technology & Data Officer at Ringier AG, Chief Operating Officer of Technology and Innovation at SAP, and President of SAP Labs China.

In cases where adding an AI expert to the board isn't an immediate option due to capacity constraints, boards can leverage existing directors who can pose relevant AI-related questions to internal experts.

Key leadership questions to consider:

• Who is the overall leader responsible for overseeing and guiding the organization's AI initiatives?

• Who is able to challenge the technology and AI strategy at the board level?

• Is the existing leadership team sufficiently tech-savvy, understanding how to optimize AI investments?

• Do we have a leader who understands the technology, digital, and data functions that can commercialize AI capability and data assets?

Back to menu

Organizational structure: using AI to break down silos

With AI’s potentially dramatic impacts on leadership and talent, your organizational structure likely needs reviewing. Previously manual tasks can be automated, and elements of shared services, reporting, and analysis will be ripe for AI disruption, requiring organizations to reevaluate their operating models and structures.

We envisage the first step on the path will focus on two key areas:

Embedding R&D capabilities in all areas of business:  While dedicated R&D teams will continue to create new products, every function within the company can have its own R&D capability, leveraging AI tools to improve their respective workflows and processes.

Aligning AI across the organization: As technology teams—including data scientists, AI engineers, and machine learning experts—become integral parts of the workforce, a more hybrid business and technology leader will begin to emerge. The best structures will facilitate collaboration between business and technology, breaking down organizational silos. This organizational fluidity will enable knowledge-sharing, foster a culture of interdisciplinary problem-solving, and democratize data and predictive capabilities. Ideally, this will empower the whole organization to contribute to strategic initiatives and problem-solving, leading to a more inclusive structure.

Key organizational structure questions to consider:

• How does the adoption of generative AI impact our current organizational structure?

• Should AI and data teams sit within the technology function or be closer to business unit leaders?

• How will business units and corporate functions work intimately with technology and AI teams?

Back to menu

Commercial strategies: new, AI-driven opportunities

As AI becomes increasingly integrated into various tools and software, it opens up new avenues for product revenue generation. By leveraging internal data and applying advanced algorithms, organizations have a unique opportunity to uncover valuable insights, identify trends, and develop innovative offerings that differentiate them from competitors.

For example, the NFL partnered with Amazon Web Services (AWS) to create the Digital Athlete, an advanced AI model designed to recreate NFL players in a virtual environment. This cutting-edge technology utilizes extensive data from the NFL, including player activity, equipment choices, speeds, weather conditions, and extensive video footage to enhance the league's understanding of injuries and improve player safety. In doing so, the NFL not only secures cost savings but also safeguards its fan base, viewership, and potential sponsorships.

In addition to creating new products, AI has the potential to revolutionize the customer experience. By harnessing AI to analyze vast amounts of customer data, organizations can better understand individual customer preferences and behaviors, delivering hyper-personalized and tailored experiences. This, in turn, allows organizations to provide more relevant products, services, and recommendations.

Key commercial strategies questions to consider:

• What potential revenue streams can we generate by commercializing our AI capability and data assets?

• Do we have the necessary infrastructure and resources to support commercialization efforts?

• How can AI help us better understand customer preferences, behaviors, and needs?

• How can AI enhance personalization in our marketing efforts?

• As we embrace AI technologies, how does our commercial strategy need to change?

Back to menu

Risk management: centering ethics and organizational values in AI systems

The complicated convergence of data and privacy regulations, cyberattacks, and governance issues is expected to grow even more challenging. By increasing their reliance on AI systems, organizations face potential vulnerabilities that hackers may exploit. Additionally, handling vast amounts of personal information introduces significant risk; if mismanaged, organizations face substantial financial and reputational consequences. Implementing best practices is not a hindrance to innovation but a proactive approach to set necessary guardrails to innovate within.

Additionally, organizations need to consider AI’s ethical implications. AI systems must be designed and implemented with organizational purpose and values in mind, and clear standards for ongoing AI use are crucial. For example, companies like Microsoft and Google have embraced responsible AI practices by formulating guiding principles that prioritize fairness, reliability, privacy, security, inclusiveness, transparency, and accountability. However, despite these efforts, the potential risks stemming from AI’s black box nature persist and must be addressed to ensure effective risk management and regulatory compliance.

Managing risk is a complex topic, and even groundbreaking technology organizations are still finding their footing. Organizations need to assess their level of comfort with the risks associated with AI and make informed decisions about how and where AI is deployed within their operations.

Key risk management questions to consider:

• What is our current risk tolerance?

• Does the company have adequate technology, legal, and compliance functions to mitigate risks associated with generative AI?

• What privacy and ethical considerations should be addressed when implementing generative AI?

• What legal and regulatory considerations are involved in commercializing data and AI?

Back to menu

What’s next?

To best harness the power of generative AI, organizations first need to understand their current digital capabilities. In doing so, they can develop a strategic AI roadmap tailored to their unique needs, values, and objectives. By considering the questions above, organizations can successfully adopt and ethically integrate AI into their future.

To learn how Russell Reynolds Associates can help you harness AI and digital capabilities, please visit our Technology, Data & Digital webpage.

Authors

Fawad Bajwa co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ AI, Analytics & Data Practice globally. He is based in Toronto and New York.

George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.

Tristan Jervis leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers capabilities. He is based in London.

Suya Xiong is a member of the Technology Officers' knowledge team. She is based in Boston.

1 Joseph Briggs, Devesh Kodnani, “Global Economics Analyst: The Potentially Large Effects of Artificial Intelligence on Economic Growth (Briggs/Kodnani)”, Goldman Sachs, March 2023.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices