How Banks Should Respond to Silicon Valley Bank’s Collapse | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Never Waste a Crisis: How Banks Should Respond to Silicon Valley Bank’s Collapse

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsFinancial ServicesBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

Robert Voth

April 28, 2023

3 min

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsFinancial ServicesBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

Recent banking collapses highlight the need for action on leadership assessment and board construction. Banks must move now to address future challenges.

Close

Robert Voth

Chicago

Seven weeks after the failure of Silicon Valley Bank, there continues to be an onslaught of analysis as to how one of the nation’s top banks could collapse so quickly. The amount of intellectual post mortem shouldn’t surprise; pundits and regulators thrive in reactionary environments where it’s easy to assign blame and armchair quarterback what management decisions should have taken place.

That’s not to say these insights aren’t valuable: they provide clarity to a public that is, once again, questioning the complexity and risk parameters of the US banking system. Some offer deep dives into the microeconomic forces that took SVB over the brink, while a smaller (but loud) subset bang the drum of increased regulations.

Unfortunately, these debates lose the most important common thread: leadership.

SVB’s board, ALCO, and executive team had access to mountains of data explaining how rising interest rates would challenge SVB’s balance sheet. Senior management had full insight into where deposits came from and what percentage were held above the $250,000 FDIC limit. Communications executives were in place to ensure the right messages were sent to investors . At every corner, within every seemingly complex web of decision making, the foundational cracks in the organization’s leadership were laid bare.

In hindsight, it’s easy to catalog where improvements in leadership were needed and what leadership should have done to prevent SVB’s collapse. But what lessons will the banking industry learn from their failure? The reactions Russell Reynolds Associates have observed to date have us concerned that banks are missing a prime opportunity to assess and improve their boards and key leadership roles.

Unfortunately, the banking industry has become extremely cautious since the collapse. The KBW Regional Banking Index has dropped more than 24%. Rising deposit rates drive higher net interest costs, tighter lending standards temper commercial loan flows, and economic forecasts continue to fluctuate. All of this leads to uncertainty—an emotion that boards, executive teams, and analysts all fear.

Uncertainty breeds inaction. At a time when banks must assess leadership and upgrade talent, most banks find themselves frozen, numbed by cost-cutting activities and clutching the mistaken safety blanket of time, waiting for economic and emotional tides to turn. The ostrich strategy is now in full force.

Banks must not stall their talent and leadership agendas. Recent studies found that, when asked about the top issues impacting organizational health, “availability of key talent / skills” is the leading concern across boards and C-suites. Additionally concerning: less than half of leaders report feeling prepared to address these talent challenges.

Leadership Implications

68%

Leaders ranked availability of key talent / skills as the top external factors impacting business for 2023

When it comes to the availability (or lack thereof) of critical talent, most leaders feel vulnerable, with only...

43%

Of leaders reporting their leadership team is prepared to address the challenges ahead

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates, Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n =1,690 global CEOs, C-suite leaders, next generation leaders, and non-executive board directors.

Banks can dedicate themselves to strengthened scenario planning, improved liquidity monitoring,  increased capital discipline, and operational rigor all they wish. But without the right leadership team, these initiatives ring hollow and often fail. Worse, these failures in management – which is exactly what they are – set banks further back as they weaken internal and external confidence.

Banks are predicting annual risk technology spend to increase 10% over the next few quarters. Increasing the sophistication of data analytics and AI to improve stress tests and real-time monitoring of risk is a multi-million dollar investment. However, our data shows that less than 30% of banking leaders feel they have the right technology executives to successfully implement these technologies and processes.

This talent gap leads to a nasty downward spiral. Investments in new technologies that fail to meet their stated objectives complicate and slow platforms already failing to meet customer expectations and heightened standard. This invites regulators to amplify the pressure to improve, and the cycle repeats itself.

Bank boards face similar challenges. According to a 2022 PwC survey of more than 700 public company directors in the US, nearly half of directors said at least one of their fellow directors needed to be replaced, with 20% of respondents looking to replace two. Less than half thought their peers had a strong grasp of cybersecurity.

One does not need a crystal ball to know what comes next. Government agencies will begin to implement overzealous and reactive proposals, offering regulatory prescriptions to cure illnesses already past.

Most banks will rush to comply and struggle to hire qualified compliance, risk, and technology executives, not to mention board members with the applicable experience to fill audit and risk committees. The war for talent will explode. Much like the beginning of 2010, executive talent will be sparse, expensive, and drive the market.

So, what can your bank do in response? Move now.

Jamie Dimon saw the need for first mover advantage in 2008 and built the industry’s top compliance and risk department at the dawn of the financial crisis. Dimon did not hesitate, and the rest of the industry spent years competing with each other to pick off his best risk and compliance executives at compensation packages far beyond JPMC’s initial build.

The end of 2023 and 2024 will surely see regulatory adjustments looking to address SVB’s and other’s failure points. The rush to hire executives qualified to meet these initiatives will be red ocean races. Demand will outstrip supply, and the cost of managing to these new regulatory expectations will be extreme.

Today’s depressed equity positions and lowered bonus expectations offer banks exceptional value when acquiring executive talent. A year from now, stock portfolios will have recovered and bonus targets reset, which will skyrocket talent acquisition costs.

At minimum, it takes two to three quarters to successfully recruit and onboard new board members. Banks must assess their boards and immediately recruit directors who possess the relevant and necessary range of experience to help guide banks through the current and upcoming tumult.

Bill Demchak, Chief Executive Officer of PNC (whose bank is headed towards a record year), summed up the situation perfectly: “These state chartered banks…had management that wasn’t up to the task. There were a handful of characters who frankly did the country a disservice.”

While it might feel counterintuitive, being aggressive and proactive in executive recruitment and board refreshment during a crisis is not contrarian – it is the exact right move. World-class organizations recognize fraught moments as opportunities and their executive acquisition strategies directly correlate to their continued success. Banks would be wise to follow suit.

Author

Robert Voth co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ global Consumer & Commercial Financial Services Practice. He is based in Chicago.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices