The New Philanthropists: Laying the Groundwork for Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The New Philanthropists: Laying the Groundwork for Leadership

Leadership StrategiesInclusionFamily BusinessLeadershipSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionCulture Analytics

Article

July 05, 2023

5 min

Leadership StrategiesInclusionFamily BusinessLeadershipSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionCulture Analytics

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

To attract the best CEO, philanthropic founders must answer questions about the core components of the organization they seek to build.

Close

Tory Clark

Atlanta
Washington DC

Jamie Hechinger

Washington DC

Katie Nivard

San Francisco

Hiring a chief executive to scale a founder’s vision is one of the most consequential decisions a social impact organization can make.

Many in the new cohort of philanthropists that have emerged in recent years are facing this challenge, seeking to extend their impact beyond the current family office or philanthropic incubator within which their efforts have grown to date.

Russell Reynolds Associates’ experience working with some of the world’s leading philanthropic and social impact organizations has given us unique insight into the process by which founders select chief executives, and the common missteps that can lead to failed searches or appointments. In this second installment of our New Philanthropists series, we share common questions that arise during inaugural chief executive searches to help founders prepare for a successful hire.

To ensure a successful outcome when hiring their first chief executive, founders must be prepared to answer questions about the core components of the organization they seek to build or scale. Potential candidates will seek clarity around vital questions such as:

“What is the organization’s theory of change?”

“What is the founder’s role relative to the chief executive?”

“What infrastructure do we need to support the outcomes we intend to drive?”

“What governance mechanisms are in place to protect the organization?”

Many founders will find they do not have answers to each question. In fact, many organizations are hiring their first chief executive to help them answer those questions. But founders will attract higher caliber candidates and ensure that the search yields fit-for-purpose leadership if they can show that they have carefully considered these elements, and that the choice to define – or not define – answers has been intentional.

Defining the components of a new social impact organization

Whether an organization is brand new, emerging from incubation, or transitioning to a new stage of growth, there are several key components that – when determined with intention – can equip it for success:

Figure 1. The components of a social impact organization

Mission and strategy

Most organizations define their mission and strategy first. This includes the theory of change—the conceptual model that describes how impact will be made. An organization’s theory of change defines the actions that an organization will take, the resources and capabilities needed to make those actions possible, the short and long-term impacts those actions will yield, and a description of the stakeholders that will benefit from those actions. This component also includes the organization’s differentiators and understanding of its “value add,” which ensures that leaders have a clear vision for how the organization is addressing an unmet need and not duplicating existing efforts. This may also result in identifying existing organizations with whom to partner to maximize impact.

Key questions around mission and strategy

What issue are we seeking to solve? Why do we exist?

What are our differentiators?

What is the time horizon for change? Is this an organization for the next 10 years or the next 100?

Maturity of mission, theory of change, and strategy: Organizations begin with varying levels of clarity and precision regarding their mission, theory of change, and strategy, and are often seeking a chief executive who can help further define this. It’s crucial to provide candidates with clear and realistic assessments of each construct’s maturity, as well as how much they’ll be expected to contribute to them.  Most importantly, candidates will understand if they have the right skillset to support such a role.

Role in ecosystem: Candidates want to see evidence that an organization has a clear understanding of its role in the broader ecosystem and that the founder has a clear vision as to how their new org will be additive, rather than duplicative.

Time horizon for impact: For grant-making organizations, it is helpful to provide candidates with a sense of the founder’s time horizon for impact, and whether there are intentions to eventually “sunset” the organization. Candidates will appreciate insight into the founder’s impact philosophy, even if specific timelines are not yet defined.

Structure and Operations

Depending on the organization’s maturity, its functional structures will vary in sophistication. This includes both the day-to-day operating model, as well as the longer term question of intended scale and geographic reach. The organization’s relationship to existing entities should be particularly relevant to new philanthropists, as many are housed in a family office, an existing foundation or other type of philanthropic incubator. In these cases, the chief executive will be expected to work with existing staff or stakeholders.

Key questions around structure and process

What legal structure will best support our mission?

What scale does the organization need to reach to make the intended impact?

How is this organization structured and/or where is it housed?

Are any existing staff part of the new organizational model?

Legal   structures: Historically, foundations have been structured as non-profit entities, either as a 501c3 or 501c4 in the US, or other type of designated charity in other jurisdictions. However, new models are emerging – including Limited Liability Companies (LLCs) and other unrestricted for-profit tax structures – that forego some of the tax incentives of these charitable designations in favor of greater flexibility in terms of disbursements and governance. There is no single “correct” structure; each organization should consider its specific objectives, as well as the legal and tax regimes where it is operating in order to determine the vehicle best suited to its needs.

Scale, sequence and composition of leadership team: Most organizations will start by hiring a chief executive, who is then tasked with building out the rest of the senior team. As such, chief executive candidates will want to understand the scale of the leadership team necessary for the intended impact, as well as any early thinking around the sequence in which that team should be built out.

Operating norms: As more organizations move towards hybrid or fully remote operations, candidates will want to understand the founder’s operating norms. If the chief executive and/or senior leadership team will be required to work on-site in a particular location, that expectation must be communicated at the outset of a search.

Existing staff and stakeholders: Clarify whether any existing staff (e.g., from a family office or fiscal sponsor) will be involved in an advisory or full time capacity in new organization, as well as their role in the search process. Especially if working with a search consultant, this clarity will ensure that the right stakeholders are providing input and the incoming executive understands the team they are inheriting.

Governance

The mechanisms that regulate and steer a nascent organization vary considerably, ranging from an initial, informal cadre of advisors to a formally appointed board with independent directors. This also includes norms around decision-making, and the founder’s involvement in day-to-day decisions. For founders who intend to bequeath governance rights to future generations – as is the case in many family foundations – the process by which that right is passed down and within generations is an important consideration.

Key questions around governance

What is our governance structure?

How are the founder’s views factored into decision-making?

How is this organization structured and/or where is it housed?

How will governance evolve over time?

Governance structure: Candidates will want to understand whether the chief executive is reporting to the founder or an independent board. If a board is in place or in the process of being formed, candidates will also want to understand the founder’s thinking around the board’s role and its independence, as well as the CEO’s role in defining future succession practices.

Relationship to other entities: Where the new organization is housed—in an existing family office, new family foundation, separate incubating organization or other corporate structure—significantly impacts the type of leader who will be successful as CEO. Candidates will seek clarity around the relationship between the new organization and any existing entities, to better understand any potential constraints or operational efficiencies.

Decision-making processes: Beyond broader considerations of the founder’s role, candidates will want to understand how involved the founder intends to be. Whether the founder plans to be involved in day-to-day decisions or only in high-level strategic decision-making will significantly impact which candidates are interested in the role.

Multigenerational considerations: If organizational governance will become an inherited right (as in the case of many family foundations), the founder should clearly define who within the family or personal network will be involved, how they will be involved while founder is still alive, and how the “governance right” is passed down across future generations.

Role of advisors: Many new organizations start out without a formal board but benefit from the input of informal advisors or professional consultants who can provide alternative perspectives. As these informal advisors often help select the chief executive, it is helpful to introduce them and explain their role to any search consultants supporting the process, as well as the role those advisors might play in the CEO’s first year in office.

Culture

Even the smallest organizations with minimal staff must be cognizant of organizational culture’s role in shaping decisions and outcomes. Ensuring that the organization is adhering to its core values and operating in a manner consistent with their mission is vital to maintaining credibility. This also includes the degree to which inclusion and belonging are prioritized in both internal decision-making and external funding decisions.

Key questions around culture

How do we ensure that our culture and values are in alignment with our mission?

What are we doing to ensure our organization is inclusive, and equitable?

What external cultures will our organization’s culture be shaped by?

Aligning operating models to mission and values:   Social impact organizations are under increasing scrutiny from prospective employees and other stakeholders to demonstrate that they are “living the mission.” Reporting structures, employee benefits, transparency of internal communications, and other manifestations of organizational culture must align with the organization’s stated values.

Making inclusion foundational: While HR functions are often the last to be established in new organizations, it’s still important that all senior leaders are establishing operational processes and cultural norms centered around inclusivity. Inclusive must be foundational priority for all senior leaders, not just those with a specific “people” remit.

Influence of existing organizations’ culture(s): If a new organization will be housed in a family office, incubated in a donor collaborative, or spun off from an existing association, it is important to understand how other organizations’ cultures will influence this new entity. Candidates will want to understand the latitude they'll have in shaping the new culture, versus working within existing norms.

Leadership

To ensure future organizational success, the founder and inaugural chief executive need a strong and effective relationship. This will lay the foundation for all future leadership hires and impact all of the above components. The organization’s evolutionary stage and the founder’s vision will dictate what skills and competencies the CEO needs to bring to the table.

Key questions around leadership

What is the chief executive’s role, relative to the founder?

What type of leader do we need for this moment in our organizational evolution?

What experiences and competencies are necessary?

Founder vs. CEO role clarity: Decision-makers need to be aligned around the chief executive’s role, particularly relative to the founder. What does the founder want to retain ownership of, and where do they seek the chief executive’s partnership? Some organizations may benefit from engaging with a third party leadership coach, who can help facilitate the working relationship and development of mutually agreed upon norms.

Founder role evolution: Related to the above, the founder’s role will likely evolve over time. Some founders begin in a hands-on capacity and evolve into a removed advisory position, while others will wish to remain intimately involved in day-to-day operations. Communicating a clear and long-term vision for the founder’s role will reassure candidates that the dynamic has been established with care and is not likely to change at the founder’s whim.

Leadership archetypes: As new organizations evolve, they require different leadership archetypes. Organizations should understand if they need an operator who can execute the founder’s vision or a strategist who can architect their own.

Ecosystem context

No social impact organization works in a vacuum, and every social challenge conceivably already has at least one existing organization working to address it. Understanding your organization’s goals within the broader ecosystem, as well as the resulting allies and partnerships, meaningfully impact its strategic direction and needed leadership style.

Key questions around ecosystem context

What other organizations and stakeholders exist in this ecosystem?

What is our role within the ecosystem?

Understanding landscape and partners: Candidates will want evidence that the founder has an appreciation for the ecosystem they seek to enter, and are respectfully engaging with what has been tried and achieved to date – even if they have new and innovative solutions to offer.

Systems-change and role within ecosystem: The increasing emphasis on systems-change has led to a proliferation of organizations working at the ecosystem level, seeking to shape how that ecosystem collaborates and directs its energy. At the same time, every ecosystem requires organizations that are focused on the day-to-day work of social change. Candidates will want to understand the role that the founder sees their organization playing in that ecosystem, and how that connects to the organization’s theory of change.

An evolving landscape with evolving solutions

While these perspectives are informed by our experience advising funders who are currently experimenting with new models and approaches to philanthropy, this field evolves so rapidly that best practices and innovations are changing at a pace that challenges even the most expert practitioners.

As such, Russell Reynolds is embarking on a collective research effort to better understand the organizational structures, leadership profiles and governance practices that will define this next era of philanthropy. Future publications in this series seek to answer questions such as:

Which chief executive archetypes are best suited to each model?

How should organizations think about building a senior leadership team, and what is the correct order of appointment for functional roles such as chief financial officer, chief people officer and others?

What successful co-leadership models can these organizations emulate?

What have organizations that have been through this journey learned?

Whether you are a funder yourself, a practitioner with experience working in new philanthropic entities, or part of a social impact organization that receives funding from these new philanthropies, we welcome your thoughts on the questions above. Designing the new paradigm of philanthropy requires a concerted and collective effort to identify the best practices that will propel impact and create lasting change.

Authors

Tory Clark co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Development, Advocacy and Philanthropy practice. She is based in Atlanta.

Vanessa Di Matteo is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education Knowledge team. She is based in London.

Jamie Hechinger co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education sector. She is based in Washington, DC.

Stefanie Lukasko leads the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education Research team. She is based in Washington, DC.

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education sector Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.

Katie Nivard is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education sector. She is based in San Francisco.

Lexi Spaulding is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education research team. She is based in San Francisco.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices