Talent Implications for Chinese Enterprises Going Global | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Talent Implications for Chinese Enterprises Going Global: A Journey of Inclusion and Culture

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionExecutive SearchInclusion and CultureTeam Performance

Article

Jeffrey Cheng

July 20, 2023

11 min

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionExecutive SearchInclusion and CultureTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Is dispatching Chinese talents to overseas business a better option than recruiting local leaders? It depends on where you are in the process.

Close

Jeffrey Cheng

Shanghai

In recent years, Chinese enterprises have accelerated their global expansions. According to data released by the Chinese Ministry of Commerce, China's all-industry outward direct investment in 2022 was RMB 985.37 billion, a year-on-year increase of 5.2%.1 However, these enterprises have encountered numerous setbacks. Leading Chinese enterprises and brands have encountered various internationalization challenges due to their business models, capital operation strategies, and compliance issues, including data privacy and taxation.

Flow of China's outward direct investment to the world (2007-2021)

Source: China National Bureau of Statistics

For most Chinese enterprises, overseas expansion is a relatively unfamiliar field and talent challenges are a crucial issue. To advise Chinese enterprises on their internationalization talent strategy, Russell Reynolds Associates conducted interviews with 12 leaders and experts from Chinese enterprises that succeeded in going global about their experiences and lessons learned.

The interview results showed that at different stages of internationalization, Chinese enterprises have different talent preferences. Based on the results, we created a general talent model for Chinese enterprises to help their internationalization.

Balancing trade-offs: Chinese enterprises' talent challenges

Overall, we found that Chinese companies face contradictions in required skills and talent availability. On issues such as personnel dispatching, local talent hiring, and executive selecting, interviewees’ answers were highly dependent on where their companies were in their global development journey.

Talent categories available to Chinese enterprises in the internationalization process

Expatriates from China: Talent is familiar and reliable, but faces challenges beyond their relevant experience

When expanding globally, dispatching executives overseas from China may be the organization’s initial solution. This approach brings many advantages, including long-term experience within the parent company, familiarity with the company's culture, and proven business capabilities.

However, there are also serious challenges to consider when deploying expatriate talent—beyond the obvious language differences, cultural adaptability, and compensation settings.

“Currently, the most needed talent for Chinese companies is international talent. But how do we define international talent? Having a background of studying abroad, language proficiency, and cultural understanding are not enough. What truly matters is the ability to expand business overseas, which means having practical experience in marketing and operations abroad.”

-Head of overseas business development of a communications company

“Leading a western team with western thinking and language to achieve the desired results for Chinese company is the biggest challenge for Chinese expatriates. This is a skill that is not commonly possessed by Chinese talent.”

-Chief human resources officer of a consumer goods company

Difficulty in obtaining overseas business experience: For a company expanding its business overseas, foreign language fluency and prior experience working abroad is not enough. Only those who have truly conducted business in overseas markets, understand business principles in said markets, and have established mature networks can be considered as truly having “overseas business experience.” However, such personnel are rare.

Lack of international thinking: In regions such as the Middle East and Europe, Chinese companies can easily find Chinese talent with local business experience. However, this talent often applies Chinese domestic company practices to the local market, as they lack firsthand experience with the local market's culture and business habits. Such personnel may have considerable resilience when working at the entry to mid-level, but often have difficulty building deep relationships with local partners and customers as leaders.

Additionally, expats themselves have various concerns. On one hand, there are quality of life concerns, including prolonged separation from family, culture shock in leisure times, and assimilation to local food and lodging.

On the other hand, there are career development concerns. Working in China’s established business lines typically provides stable performance, leading to predictable returns and promotions. However, the performance prospects overseas are less certain.

Because expats face these challenges, Chinese companies should not ignore local talent when establishing overseas business. These local executives can effectively balance the issues expatriate leaders face, while also coaching said leaders as they transit into new roles.

Local talents: Long-term benefits balanced with longer adaptation and training timelines

Compared with expats from China, locally hired leaders—particularly those working at Chinese businesses that are highly integrated into the local market—bring many advantages, including:

Better understanding of local practices: Local talent have a deep understanding of the local market and culture, which can help Chinese enterprises better respond to local market opportunities and challenges.

Easier to establish local connections: Local talent tend to have rich networks, which can help Chinese enterprises establish business networks, find opportunities and partners, and establish a good brand reputation.

Easier to communicate with stakeholders: Language and cultural differences may cause unnecessary trouble for businesses. Local talent can use the same language as local investors, customers, suppliers, regulatory agencies, and media to help Chinese enterprises establish good relationships with various stakeholders.

Easier to understand local regulations and policies: Local talent can help Chinese enterprises better understand local regulations and policies to ensure compliance.

Despite these benefits, some Chinese companies are hesitant to hire local talent, due to cultural, leadership, and lifestyle differences between Chinese leaders and local talent. Because of this, some Chinese companies and expatriate leaders believe that it is difficult for local leaders to stay strategically consistent with the dispatched team and Chinese headquarters.

However, refusing to engage with local talent is unsustainable. While deploying Chinese leaders might maintain short-term efficiencies, it sacrifices the company's development in the long run. When Chinese companies expand overseas, they should aim to improve their existing corporate culture, laying the foundation for successful transformation into an inclusive multinational company.

A diverse talent slate enables better team integration

To better integrate their teams, Chinese companies should seek out “integration agents”—talent with multi-faceted backgrounds who can ease team blending and buffer any potential friction. But who are these “integration agents”?

One archetype includes people who understand both Chinese and foreign situations, including top Chinese talents living in a foreign market, or foreign senior professionals who have worked in China for a long time.

Another archetype encompasses global leaders who can be added to local teams to strengthen its inclusive leadership. This approach is more common once overseas teams have a certain degree of autonomy—that is, once they’ve integrated into the local market and achieved localized operation.

Leadership models for overseas branches

Recommendations for Chinese enterprises' overseas talent strategy

When expanding internationally, Chinese enterprises have different requirements at different phases. To help Chinese companies navigate these fluid talent needs, we created a talent model that highlights the level of investment needed across the overseas expansion phases, including: export trade, overseas direct investment, market integration, and multinational corporation.

Talent model for Chinese enterprises expanding abroad

In this figure, each line represents an agenda of local teams, addressing on talents and team building. The significance of each agenda fluctuates in different phases of global development.

1. Export Trade Phase

The company begins to export products or services to foreign markets while it gradually establishes overseas sales channels and networks. This is the first step for business to go abroad, but not counted as a real overseas expansion.

As shown in the model, the factors in various dimensions are accumulating, but have not yet been put into action at this stage.

In order to effectively communicate and cooperate with overseas customers and partners, companies need talent who are proficient in foreign languages and have a certain understanding of the destination market.

2. Overseas Direct Investment Phase

This is the first and most difficult stage of the internationalization process. Companies establish overseas branches or offices through investments and/or mergers and acquisitions. Committing to enter the market, companies might focus on building stable supply chains and distribution channels locally.

As shown in the model, various factors have not yet fully converged, but will soon collide. At this stage, the parent company needs to invest a lot to support the overseas branch, which is not yet autonomous. In terms of the composition of personnel in overseas branches, Chinese expatriate executives and employees are dominant. The cost of team integration is higher than its benefits, but in order to develop steadily to the next phase, early design on team and culture integration should be made at this stage.

“Without communication, people's determination to do things will be completely different. If there is no communication between Chinese and foreign personnel within the team, there will be no output in overseas business. To achieve this, it is required that Chinese enterprises have confidence in team communication and not give up due to short-term discomfort.”

-Chief human resources officer of a consumer goods company

Chinese companies at this stage should pay attention to the following:

Preliminary investigation: Conduct investigations into the specific local market situation, such as consumer preferences and the availability of supply chains. Additionally, organizations needs to fully understand the local legal and regulatory requirements and employment policies to avoid compliance risks.

Organization and role design: International expansion should be highly top-down work. Using the insights from preliminary investigation, the parent company in China can set clear stage goals in the process, and design organizational structures and key positions for specific situations in a certain market.

Communication with headquarters: The cooperation between the parent company in China and the overseas branch is also crucial for team integration. An effective and sustainable communication channel should be established between the two as early as possible to build mutual trust and maintain consistency.

Cultural respect: Respect the culture and working habits of local employees. Avoid simply applying Chinese management concepts and cultural ideas.

Standard training: Arrange specifically designed training for expatriates and local employees in overseas branches that establish common terms to improve overall recognition.

Equity: Meeting participation should be based on business needs, rather than on nationality. Holding business discussions only among Chinese expats, and conveying discussion results to local employees after the fact is not a desirable practice.

Address conflicts: Embrace constructive conflict to enhance team communication. Treating Chinese and local personnel differently to attempt to keep the peace will only split the team further. Evading conflicts, although it may improve short-term efficiency, deepens estrangement in the long run.

3. Market Integration Phase

During market integration, the company has already established a foothold in the local market. Continued success no longer depends on investment from the parent company, but mainly on the local branch's ability to handle its own market, products, and brand image.

As shown in the model, factors in multiple dimensions are colliding. At this stage, the overseas branch has some autonomy, and is expected to customize products and services to local market preferences. Local talent and global leaders comprise the majority of the team, and there are higher employer branding requirements. In this phase, communication between the overseas team and headquarters are still undergoing adjustments and team integration costs are at their highest.

In addition to maintaining the good foundation laid in the previous phases, Chinese companies should also:

Localize operations: To achieve flexible localized strategies, the overseas team should be given increased decision-making power. Additionally, global talent should take on more leadership roles.

Reduce conflict points: For overseas branches that have carried out mature localized operations, it’s ideal to let local executives serve as the head of the overseas team and report to the headquarters. When structured this way, local personnel report to local leaders, rather than the Chinese team, minimizing cultural conflicts and integration issues.

Promote legal and cultural awareness: Stay compliant with labor laws, respect the local working culture, gradually establish a reputation and brand among local employees, and create a healthy corporate culture.

Cooperate locally: Build relationships with local governments, universities, research institutions, etc. Establish high-level cooperation mechanisms to further enhance influence.

Promote communication: Invite global executives and teams to visit the headquarters in China. By meeting colleagues in person, mutual understanding can be enhanced.

4. Multinational Corporation Phase

When the company has achieved integration in multiple markets, it is ready to become a multinational corporation. In this phase, the company implements a diversified strategy, satisfies preferences in different markets through diversified product lines, and explores global resource integration to optimize global business layout. Additionally, global business and functional processes should be standardized and integrated via the unification of financial, supply chain, and human resources processes. Once complete, the organization will become a mature global enterprise.

As shown in the model, various conflicts have been mostly resolved in this stage. Overseas branches have a high degree of autonomy and can independently explore diversified strategies, bringing benefits to the enterprise. At this point, the company is no longer divided into Chinese and foreign talent, but functions as one team. Global talent not only serves as regional leaders, but also have opportunities to join management or the board. The global team speaks the same language, shares common beliefs, and works toward the same goals. Team integration costs are greatly reduced. Due to the sustained focus on team and culture in previous phases, the entire organization begins to enjoy benefits at this stage.

This final phase will only be reached if the company sustains its attention on and investment in equitable and inclusive team building from the initial stages of global expansion.

Globalization as a journey of inclusion and culture

Chinese companies expanding overseas are embarking on a long-term project that requires continuous investment in talents, teams, and culture to ensure sustainable, global business development. This is not only true for Chinese companies that are going global, but also for global companies investing in various parts of the world, including China.

In this uncertain era, maintaining an open-mind, embracing inclusion and culture, and accommodating different backgrounds, experiences, and ways of thinking will bring long-term benefits to companies. Attracting global talent to Chinese companies will undoubtedly provide long-term benefits on your globalization journey.

“Entrepreneurs need to go out and interact with various local people, telling them who we are, what kind of people we need, and what opportunities we may create in the future. Only by doing so can we gradually increase our visibility and raise the profile of Chinese enterprises in the area.”

- Chief human resources officer of a consumer goods company

“Entrepreneurs themselves should maintain an open mindset and respect local cultures. The company's management consciousness should keep up and understand that the management of multinational enterprises cannot be done in the same way as Chinese companies, and that the model of Chinese enterprises cannot be applied universally. Instead, a modular management approach should be adopted.”

- Head of a luxury brand

“The biggest problem with business is people not understanding one another, and if you're able to bridge this divide, it makes everything possible.”

- A European entrepreneur with deep experience in working with Chinese companies

“No matter how large a Chinese enterprise is, when it goes to another country, it is just a small company. It needs to gradually establish a good reputation among local employees and cannot ignore ethics. Haste makes waste. If the company moves too quickly but makes mistakes, the cost of starting over will be even higher, as the company's reputation in the local area may already be damaged.”

- Human Resources leader of a real estate company

“As overseas projects become increasingly difficult, it becomes necessary to have people who are familiar with the local politics, economy, and culture. It is also necessary to have locals manage locals and create more value. This is a great test of our company's management level.”

- A former official of the Ministry of Commerce in South America

Authors

Jeffrey Cheng leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ China Account Practice. He is based in Shanghai.
Chensong Li is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ China Accounts knowledge team. He is based in Shanghai.

Special thanks

Sharon Tan is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment, Culture, and Development knowledge team. She is based in Singapore.
Justine Qin is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ China Accounts knowledge team. She is based in Beijing.

Footnotes
1 Head of Cooperation Department of the Ministry of Commerce discusses China's foreign investment cooperation situation in 2022

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices