Talent Trends in Real Estate – 2023 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Talent Trends in Real Estate – 2023

Industry TrendsFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalReal EstateExecutive SearchBoard EffectivenessDevelopment and Transition

Article

March 08, 2023

3 min

Industry TrendsFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalReal EstateExecutive SearchBoard EffectivenessDevelopment and Transition

Executive summary

Russell Reynolds Associates captured 4 developing themes that redefine the 2023 talent landscape.

Close

Debra Barbanel

Los Angeles

Cameron Scott

New York

1. Short-Term Slowdown & Cautious Optimism

Overview

While we expect slower hiring and some clients are “pausing” recruiting mandates, there is no evidence of major adjustments to 2023 talent strategies

Impact

Two themes are emerging around functional demand:

An emphasis on Portfolio Management. Clients are “re-purposing” investment professionals into asset management, increasing analytical rigor of asset management and allowing investment professionals to apply skills in a new way, while more directly exposing asset managers to these individuals for collaborative learning across functions

Nearly 70% of global leaders are concerned about the availability of key talent, creating higher demand for cross-functional skills1

Portfolio Management roles are increasing in influence, positioning, and strategic input

Increase in using data analytics to optimize portfolios: This is generally a newly created role, particularly prevalent within private capital environments

2. Focus on Alternative Investments

Overview

Increasing attention to alternative asset classes such as manufactured and student housing, self-storage and single family residential.

Impact

We saw new fund launches in 2022 and expect this activity to continue into 2023, with over $250 billion in dry powder focused on the North American real estate market2

Infrastructure platforms embracing a cross-pollination of talent, in particular partnering with digital infrastructure and data center experts to capitalize on broader knowledge

Conversion of office and retail assets into other/more broad categories:

Historical office investors/owners seeking talent from mixed use, life sciences, health care and other asset categories in order to successfully re-position assets

Deep silo expertise is giving way to cross-asset class experience to support agility

3. Rise in Debt Funds

Overview

Clients who are focused on driving transaction activity, especially in an acquisition stagnant market, are creating or enhancing capabilities within debt funds

Impact

Repositioning assets with floating interest rates puts pressure on owners. Debt funds are stepping in, refortifying the capital stack

In 2022, six new firms launched debt funds. Globally, over 30% of private real estate debt funds were raised by the top five firms3

Three themes are developing around debt funds:

Given higher productions over the past two years, we have seen an increase in compensation for originations talent

Demand for gender and ethnic diversity in an already limited talent pool

Increased attention on recruiting leaders with equity expertise who are open to applying their experience in a debt fund

4. Emphasis on Succession & Development

Overview

Clients are assessing board composition and C-suite executives in light of changing business strategies, while investing in talent development at all levels to increase retention

Impact:

Investing in existing talent creates three competitive advantages:

Enhances stickiness of high-quality talent through a demonstrated commitment to development

Focuses leadership on development needs and skill gaps in the organization, especially relative to changing environments

Demonstrates to mid and junior-level talent an emphasis on career development; many of these individuals have not seen a downturn and are anxious about their futures, thus the commitment is reassuring

Talent Trends in Real Estate – 2023 | Full report

Download full report

Previous reports

Talent Trends in Real Estate 2022

Find out more

Talent Trends in Real Estate 2022 – Shaping What’s Next

Find out more

Authors

Deb Barbanel leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Real Estate practice. She is based in Los Angeles.

Kristi Walters is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Real Estate Practice. She is based in Dallas.

Cameron Scott is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Real Estate Practice. She is based in New York.

James Baek is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services knowledge team. He is based in New York.

References

1 RRA Analysis, Global Leadership Monitor Q4 2022

2 Real estate investment trends and outlook: Winter 2023

3 The Real Estate Debt 50 2022

Learn More About the Authors and The Real Estate Practice

Learn more

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices