The Evolving Academy Finance Landscape | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Evolving Academy Finance Landscape

Industry TrendsLeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Article

+ 1 author

May 11, 2023

7 min

Industry TrendsLeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Once the gold standard of top public company CFOs, big four accounting experience is going out of style as investment banking CFOs come into focus.

Close

Callie Bennett

San Francisco

Jim Lawson

New York

David Norton

Chicago

Maggie Walsh

Chicago

Academy companies—defined as organizations with extraordinary reputations for developing top talent—have evolved significantly over the past 10 years when it comes to finance talent. To better understand these shifts in top finance talent development, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed the experiences and backgrounds of S&P 2000 CFOs from 2012 to 2022 (N = 4000).

Via our analysis, we found that:

As the CFO remit broadens, there has been a dramatic shift from the CPA CFO to the strategic and operationally savvy CFO archetype

Investment banking experience has grown significantly more common over the past 10 years

The MBA is going out of style

The academy conglomerate pipeline has lost its luster

Defining the strategic CFO

Over the past ten years, the CFO role and remit have broadened,1 requiring CFOs to have both business acumen and an operational orientation. This has been a dramatic shift from CFO’s historical training in accounting, controls, and audit.

Figure 1. S&P 500 role prior to first CFO role by tenure

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 02/01/2023, N = 500 | *Finance Operations includes VP/SVP/EVP Finance, Deputy/Divisional CFO, and FP&A roles

The operationally savvy CFO rises through finance operations, FP&A or divisional CFO track and is an expert at partnering with the business. The strategic CFO brings a big picture, investor/stakeholder value mindset, having risen through the banking, consulting, and/or corporate development track. This leading CFO archetype has implications for financial officer designation requirements (MBA, CPA) and the relevance of traditional academy finance companies.

Big Four experience remains a staple – but is steadily declining

While the Big Four remain the top academy organizations for S&P 2000 CFOs, there has been a steady decline in the number of CFOs who start their careers there (see Appendix Table 1).  Similarly, there has been a notable decline of less tenured CFOs who hold CPAs (Figure 2).

Figure 2. % of S&P 2000 CFOs with CPA designation

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 2000 companies in 2012 and 2022, N = 4000

Instead, we see a rise in financial services experience, specifically at investment banks, likely due to continued pressure to focus on strategic initiatives and M&A growth. Within the top 25 academy companies, from 2012 to 2022, we see a 17 percentage point increase in financial services companies (Figure 3). The likes of Goldman Sachs (6x), Morgan Stanley (2x), and Credit Suisse (6x) see some of the larger jumps in the number of CFOs with company experience (see Appendix Table 1).  Concurrently, we see an increase in investment banking experience amongst Generation X and millennial CFOs (Figure 4).

Figure 3. Top 25 S&P 2000 CFO academy companies by industry

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 2000 companies in 2012 and 2022, N = 4000 | BP&S is Business and Professional Services.

Figure 4. % of 2022 S&P 2000 CFOs with investment banking experience by generation

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 2000 companies in 2012 and 2022, N = 4000

The MBA is going out of style

The number of CFOs with MBAs increased slightly from 42% in 2012 to 48% in 2022. However, when we look at CFOs by generational divides in 2022, we see a decrease in the MBA's popularity for younger generations (e.g., millennials) (Figure 5). This suggests that we will continue to see a decrease in MBAs as more millennials come into the top seat.

Figure 5. % of 2022 S&P 2000 CFOs with MBA by generation

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 2000 companies in 2012 and 2022, N = 4000

The top five MBA programs stayed consistent from 2012 to 2022 (see Appendix Table 2) however, there was a significant jump in attendance at Wall Street pipeline schools, such as Wharton, Columbia, and NYU Stern, which aligns with the increase in investment banking experience amongst CFOs. Historically, many who possessed MBAs would pursue finance roles post-graduation, but as the economy evolved, MBAs have shifted to pursuing roles in technology and other high-growth fields. Many employers no longer require MBAs for promotion to senior roles, which may also be a contributing factor to the decline of MBAs among the youngest generation of finance executives.

The academy conglomerate pipeline has lost its luster

Historically, certain large corporations were hotbeds for training top finance talent via rotational programs across a variety of business sectors and finance roles. As the result of some of these companies driving more centralized finance structures in functions such as accounting, tax and treasury, finance talent has become more specialized. With increased specialization and less vertically run companies, there are fewer academy finance opportunities to rotate from the business to corporate resulting in less CFO representation from these companies in the long term. On the other hand, companies like General Electric — which maintained its academy structure for another decade — have better CFO representation in 2022 (see Appendix Table 1).

While experience at these companies is highly regarded, we expect a continued decline in CFOs with conglomerate academy training, as the average CFO with this type of experience has over 30 years of experience. As Generation X and baby boomer CFOs age out of the role, investment banking experience, management consulting, and scrappier start-up experience will become more common among future generations.

Academy companies: a moving target

The composition of academy finance companies continues to be shaped by external market factors. Once the gold standard amongst public company CFOs, public accounting experience is being outpaced by investment banking experience. As organizations moved towards capital allocation and growth, CFOs with investment banking experience brought the strategic experience necessary to partner with CEOs through this phase. The shift towards strategic CFOs, means more CFOs have become potential CEO successors than in the past.2

With the rapid expansion of technology companies (e.g. Netflix, Amazon) over the past ten years, we anticipate the makeup of academy finance companies to evolve away from those with consumer and industrial backgrounds towards leaders from tech as their finance talent becomes CFO-ready.

As we look to the future, we already seeing a shift the profile of the successful CFO. Currently, we are observing less demand for investment banker-CFOs as companies focus on profitable growth given the decline in M&A transactions and IPOs particularly post the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank.3 While investment banking backgrounds were the preferred profile of 2022, the next few years could define the preferred CFO profile and academy training grounds of tomorrow.

Assessing, developing, and hiring the CFO of tomorrow

As the board, CEO, and CFO work together to define the ideal CFO and finance team profiles, they must also keep future market challenges and opportunities in mind. The CFO of the future will look markedly different from CFOs past, and this profile will continue to evolve.

Define the CFO success profile: To know where you need to go, you first need to understand where you are. Create and align stakeholders on a job description and target profile and assess internal talent against it before looking externally. Remember that this profile should be reassessed annually and updated as trends continue to shift.

Create actionable development and succession plans: Once the CFO and finance team have been assessed, focus on creating development plans based on current gaps. Activate development plans and support with mentoring and CFO-specific programs. Building a successful finance talent pipeline isn’t a one-off event; organizations need to remain prepared for C-suite succession and transition.

Remain flexible and informed: If CFO change is needed within a shorter time horizon, seek to understand the current market and be open to the evolving finance academy companies, designations, and educational degrees. What was once the gold standard for one generation may not be the same for the next.

Authors

Callie Bennett is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Financial Officers
Practice. She is based in San Francisco.

Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Financial Officers Practice. He is based in New York.

David Norton is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Financial Officers Practice. He is based in Chicago.

Catherine Schroeder leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Toronto

Maggie Walsh is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Financial Officers
Practice. She is based in Chicago.

References

1.	Wall Street Journal, ‘Companies Broaden CFOs’ Responsibilities to Retain Them In Strong Job Market’, 2022

2.	Is the CFO the Right Next CEO? | Russell Reynolds Associates

3.	SVB Collapse Spurs Finance Executives to Re-Evaluate Cash Strategies - WSJ

The Evolving Academy Finance Landscape

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices