Framing Sustainability Through The Value Creation Lens | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Framing Sustainability Through The Value Creation Lens

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability Officers

Article

February 09, 2023

3 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability Officers

Executive Summary

Companies' sustainability efforts tend to be more successful when they are seen as levers for value creation. Here's why.

Close

Sustainability is not just a financial or marketing initiative; it should be woven through the fabric of how an organization does business. Using environmental, social, and governance initiatives to drive value for the business creates more fully integrated and longer-lasting strategies than individual sustainability projects or initiatives.

In this three-article series ‘Commitment to Sustainability’, we delve into research from the Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2021-2022 Global Leadership Monitor and 2021 Divides and Dividends to help organizations in different geographic regions and industries build and maintain effective sustainability strategies for the future.

Ultimately, executives need to fully grasp three key areas when setting sustainability goals and metrics. Read on below to learn about framing sustainability through a value creation lens, or navigate to our other articles in the series:

1. How CEO commitment affects sustainability integration

2. Framing sustainability through a value creation lens

3. Holding executives accountable: tying financial metrics to sustainability outcomes

What’s motivating leaders’ sustainability actions?

Companies are typically motivated by at least one (and possibly multiple) sustainability objectives:

Value creation: The objective is to increase financial and social value, e.g. creating new sustainable products or services or serving new markets or customers.

Brand management: The objective is to be viewed by stakeholders as socially responsible and reputable, for the sake of competitive differentiation.

Impact reduction: The objective is to reduce the negative consequences of unsustainable operations or products and services.

Risk avoidance: The objective is to avoid the negative impacts of regulation, fines, boycotts, or diminished access to capital.

CEO commitment by sustainability driver

Leaders with publicly committed CEOs tend to approach sustainability strategy through a value creation lens slightly more than their global counterparts, and five times more than those without a committed CEO. Organizations without CEO commitment struggle to set a clear sustainability approach four times more than their global counterparts, and 17 times more than those with a committed CEO. This underscores how critical CEO commitment is to integrating sustainability into the fabric of the business for a successful sustainability strategy.

Sustainability Driver by CEO Commitment to ESG

Global view: Value creation on the rise in sustainability strategy

Value creation is rising as the most common approach to sustainability strategy globally, and organizations tend to be more successful when they focus on the creation of value rather than other approaches such as brand management or risk avoidance.

The focus on value creation as a sustainability driver has risen by 9% from the RRA Divides & Dividends research in 2021  to the RRA Global Leadership Monitor in 2022 , while all other approaches have declined relative to 2021.

Which of these statements is the closest to describing the driving force behind your company’s approach to sustainability?
2021 to 2022

Globally, 30% percent of leaders report that their organizations’ sustainability strategy is driven by value creation, while 29% say it is rooted in brand management. Value creation is also a more common approach among board directors (37%) and next generation leaders (35%) than current C-level executives (23%) and CEOs (27%).

The success of a value creation approach

Taking a value creation approach to sustainability strategy has several benefits for organizational success. Leaders whose organizations approach sustainability with a value creation mindset are more likely to believe that their leadership team effectively embraces sustainability outcomes, and more often expect that their company will make good progress in the next five years.

Belief  that leadership team effectively embraces sustainability opportunities

82% of value creation driven leaders

63% of brand management driven leaders

77% of impact reduction driven leaders

46% of risk avoidance driven leaders

Expectation that company will make good progress in the next five years

54% of value creation driven C-suite leaders

36% of brand management driven C-suite leaders

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Survey, n = 1,590 global executives. Russell Reynolds Associates’ Divides & Dividends research, n = 907 C-suite leaders.

Regional view: Value creation adoption highest in China/Hong Kong and Germany

Different regions apply different lenses to sustainability approaches, due to individual, regional, or national governance laws. Executives in China and Hong Kong adopt a value creation approach 42% of the time, which is more than their global counterparts.

Executives in Germany also favor a value creation approach more than other strategies, with 38% adhering to this approach. Australia, the United States, and the United Kingdom are more even on their distribution of value creation versus brand management adoption, with approximately one-third of executives in each country adopting value creation or brand management.

Which of these statements is the closest to describing the driving force behind your company’s approach to sustainability?
By Country

Industry view: Value creation adoption highest in the industrial and natural resources industry

Value creation is adopted at a particularly high rate in the industrial and natural resources (INR) industry and financial services industry, whereas consumer and professional services organizations tend to use a brand management approach more frequently.

The INR industry is over 1.5 times higher than their global counterparts on value creation, and nearly two times higher than the next closest investment of 26% for brand management within the industry itself. For industries that have more external facing clients, such as professional services, the focus is 45% on brand management and only 13% on value creation. The majority of these leaders from the INR industry are from oil/gas/energy, construction/infrastructure, manufacturing/capital equipment, chemicals, or automotive subsectors.

From our sector work, we know that many companies in the INR industry have historically felt threatened by initiatives to increase sustainability, but now see them as opportunities to enter new market areas and expand their product offerings. Companies are moving towards integration in their overall strategy.

Which of these statements is the closest to describing the driving force behind your company’s approach to sustainability?
By Industry

Turning these insights into action

Use a value creation lens to approach sustainability

Frame sustainability around a value creation approach

Value creation is a more proactive approach to sustainability strategy, putting the leadership team in a strong position to drive sustainability progress forward, rather than reacting to external factors. Ensure that sustainability goals are tied directly into the core fabric of business operations.

Leveraging a value creation approach can help organizations identify new ways to integrate sustainability in creative ways within different functional areas.

Commitment to Sustainability Series

How CEO Commitment Affects Sustainability Integration

Find out more

Commitment to Sustainability Series

Holding Executives Accountable: Tying Financial Metrics to ESG Outcomes

Find out more

Methodology

2021/2022 Global Leadership Monitor
The Global Leadership Monitor is an annual online survey of executives and non-executives. The Global Leadership Monitor tracks key threats to organizational health and leadership preparedness to face them, as well as indicators of confidence in leadership, and leaders' engagement and career aspirations.

All data has been weighted by GDP to create a more representative share of business contribution from each market. Not all percentages in charts add up to 100% as a result of rounding percentages and the decision in certain cases to exclude the display of certain sectors and “neither/nor,” “unsure,” “other,” “none of the above,” and “don’t know” responses.

Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed our global network of executives using an online/mobile survey in February and March of 2021, and in March of 2022.

2021 Divides and Dividends Research
The study was conducted with 9,500 employees and next-generation leaders in 11 growth and mature markets from April 16 to May 12, 2021.

Authors

Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.
Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.
Gabrielle Lieberman is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.

Acknowledgments

Francesco Menonna is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ industrial/natural resources team. He is based in New York.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices