Swiss Companies Make Progress on Sustainability Leadership, But Still Have Work to Do | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Swiss Companies Make Progress on Sustainability Leadership, But Still Have Work to Do

Next Generation BoardsIndustry TrendsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO Advisory

Article

March 23, 2023

3 min

Next Generation BoardsIndustry TrendsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO Advisory

Executive Summary

Businesses on the Swiss Market Index (SMI) took big strides toward sustainable leadership in 2022.

Close

Corrado Menghini

Zurich

Alexandra Ettlin

Zurich

The value of sustainability is undeniable. Around the world, we’re seeing companies outperform their competition by focusing on creating long-term, far-reaching benefits for investors, employees, customers, and the wider community.

It’s no surprise, then, that our Executive Committee Study, which analyzes publicly available data on Switzerland’s listed companies, found the 20 businesses on the Swiss Market Index (SMI) took big strides toward sustainable leadership in 2022.

SMI companies are leading the way in sustainability

Switzerland’s largest listed companies have now all tied a portion of their executives’ compensation to environmental, social, and governance (ESG) goals, up from 65% in 2021. Most impressively, 75% have created and openly published clear KPIs to effectively link remuneration to sustainability. This will ensure SMI companies have targeted strategies for advancing ESG activities, and executives will have the motivation to deliver.

Our Executive Committee Study also analyzed who is responsible for sustainability and found promising signs of it being a top priority in Swiss C-suites.

We were able to gather data on 17 of the 20 SMI companies and found six were managing sustainability through a central function. In five of these cases, there was an executive committee member with “sustainability” in their job title, while the sixth had made sustainability a part of the Chief Risk Officer’s role.

These companies are most likely to drive sustainability actions. With a chief sustainability officer—even one with wider responsibilities—there’s someone dedicating time and effort to sustainability and giving it a voice at the executive level.

At another seven companies, the CEO was responsible for sustainability. This gives sustainability the chance to become part of all major initiatives and discussions. But if the CEO simply hosts a roundtable of sustainability experts a few times a year, then it becomes a checkbox task.

The remaining four companies are in a tricky position when it comes to delivering on sustainability ambitions. They’ve given sustainability to a CFO, divisional leader, or regional head, creating a significant risk of it being just one of many topics on a long to-do list. And any actions these leaders do manage to take are unlikely to join up with the entire organization, minimizing their impact.

SMIM companies have work to do to catch up

The story of Switzerland’s second tier of listed companies, those in the Swiss Market Index Mid (SMIM), shows there’s still significant room for improvement. Only 60% of SMIM companies have linked sustainability to compensation, and half of those haven’t published clear KPIs.

When it comes to sustainability responsibility, only two companies manage sustainability through a central, executive-level function—and only one SMIM executive has sustainability in their title. However, in 44% of the 16 SMIM companies we were able to analyze, the CEOs are responsible for sustainability, so there is still potential for many companies to deliver meaningful actions.

Interestingly, 37% of SMIM companies have made sustainability a part of the CFO’s responsibilities. While this runs the risk of deprioritizing sustainability, it could also hint at an understanding of the financial value of sustainable leadership.

Corporate sustainability is on the right path in Switzerland

The year-on-year increase in the prominence of sustainability within Swiss executive teams is a promising sign for the future. As all stakeholders continue to demand meaningful action on ESG issues, sustainable leadership at the very top of companies will unlock transformational value.

Yet Switzerland’s largest listed companies aren’t in a position where they can rest. There’s still room for improvement, particularly within the SMIM.

A chief sustainability officer would be a good place for many to start as they would give sustainability a strong voice in the C-suite. Over time, they could make the topic part of the DNA of the company and encourage each function to integrate sustainability into its operations.

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Online Grocery Spiked During COVID-19. What Now?

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices