Activating Sustainability in the Boardroom | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Activating Sustainability in the Boardroom

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard of DirectorsBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability Officers

Article

December 06, 2022

5 min

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard of DirectorsBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability Officers

Executive summary

Boards can more successfully support sustainability initiatives if they focus on collaboration with management.

Close

Sarah Galloway

London

Laura Sanderson

London

Rich Fields

Boston

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

Read the study in full here

The business case for sustainability has never been stronger

Organizations are under increasing pressure to create holistic approaches to sustainability and broader Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) strategies to meet regulatory requirements and societal and investor expectations. At the same time, sustainability also presents an enormous opportunity for value creation to those that develop more sustainable products or solutions.

Russell Reynolds Associates examined the role boards can play in activating sustainability across their organization, setting out:

The importance of forging a collaborative relationship with the management team

The four key areas of board responsibility when it comes to sustainability

Actionable recommendations and examples of implementing effective sustainability oversight

Board directors should focus their sustainability oversight broadly on four key responsibilities: educating, integrating, overseeing, and ratifying.

The importance of forging a collaborative relationship with the management team

The four key areas of board responsibility when it comes to sustainability

Educate

Educate directors on material sustainability risks and opportunities to equip the board to productively contribute to their company’s sustainability strategy discussions.

Actions boards can take to educate directors:

1. Create dedicated sustainability training sessions.
2. Conduct materiality assessments.
3. Prioritize stakeholder engagement.
4. Educate committee chairs and members on sustainability.
5. Develop a shared sustainability framework.

Integrate

Integrate sustainability risks and objectives into board processes and internal control and risk management system.

Actions boards can take to integrate sustainability into the board’s responsibilities:

1. Include sustainability in planning conversations.
2. Fully integrate sustainability into the board’s process.
3. Create accountability.

Oversee

Oversee key sustainability risks, opportunities, and management’s KPIs on an ongoing basis and in close partnership with the management team.

Actions boards can take to oversee sustainability progress:

1. Set clear metrics.
2. Discuss progress frequently.
3. Stay informed about risks and opportunities.
4. Integrate sustainability into culture oversight.

Ratify

Ratify management’s sustainability metrics and related disclosures.

Actions boards can take to ratify sustainability progress:

1. Communicate the sustainability journey.
2. Report on sustainability metrics.
3. Prioritize compliance and audit of sustainability goals.
4. Proactively monitor for sustainability-related risks.

Actionable recommendations and examples of implementing effective sustainability oversight

01

Implement temporary multi-committee responsibility

02

Cultivate a sustainable mindset in current and future board directors

03

Integrate sustainability into organizational culture

Activating Sustainability in the Boardroom

READ THE STUDY IN FULL HERE

Authors

Louise Belloin is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO & Board practice. She is based in Paris.
Molly Conte is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO & Board practice. She is based in Boston.
Sarah Galloway co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice. She is based in London.
Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.
Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Sustainability Knowledge teams. She is based in Portland.
Laura Sanderson leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ operations in the UK and oversees the firm’s Board & CEO Advisory Partners team throughout Europe. She is based in London.

Acknowledgements

Tobias Blickle is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO & Board practice. He is based in Munich.
Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
Rich Fields leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ team advising on Board Effectiveness and is a member of the firm’s Board and CEO practice. He is based in Boston.
Natasha Treschow is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO & Board practice. She is based in London.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Private EquityPrivate CreditBoard of Directors

Why Athletes Make Effective Leaders

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices