The Rise of the Networked Generalist | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Rise of the Networked Generalist

Leadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationCustomer Activation and GrowthSuccessionBoard Composition and SuccessionCulture RiskSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersExecutive SearchBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite Succession

Article

June 07, 2023

7 min

Leadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationCustomer Activation and GrowthSuccessionBoard Composition and SuccessionCulture RiskSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersExecutive SearchBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite Succession

Executive Summary

In an intensifying new world disorder, the networked generalist may be best positioned to serve evolving needs of global organizations.

Close

Business requires a new breed of leader to navigate the increasingly complex challenges that modern companies face. We call these leaders “networked generalists,” and their strength lies in their ability to simultaneously address a multitude of issues in an interconnected manner. These leaders must have experience working in high-risk and uncertain environments, be comfortable making decisions with less precise data, and bring a holistic perspective that enables them to look at problems and identify solutions from a much wider vantage.

But to understand the networked generalist and the context in which they are needed, we must first understand how the current context came to be.

An intensifying new world disorder

Throughout the second half of the 20th century, the global economy benefited from the post-WW2 new world order that sought to integrate countries into a competitive, but peaceful, global economic network. This business paradigm rewarded specialization and competition, encouraging increasingly niche markets and the rise of increasingly specialized business leaders.

But around the turn of the century, a new world “disorder” developed, reflecting increasingly complex geopolitical relationships and breakdown of the norms that previously governed them. Characterized by extreme political polarization, widening social inequalities, and rapid adoption of new technologies, this disordered reality challenged global institutions – including multi-national companies – to adapt.

In recent years, this new world disorder has intensified, with the addition of new social dimensions--responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, addressing the racial reckoning that spread across North America, and complying with government sanctions on Russia after it invaded Ukraine--compounding its effects.

A paradigm shift for business

As multinational companies expand, supply chains grow increasingly global, and geopolitical risk emerges in new, unpredictable ways, companies are being challenged to provide answers to new questions:

Should our business focus on creating stakeholder value, and if so, how?

How can we expand our business in emerging markets without costly unintended consequences?

What is our level of exposure to geopolitical risk? What is our plan in the event of significant crises?

This paradigm shift has also disordered the decision-making processes that specialization was designed to optimize. The interconnectedness of our systems means problems are harder to predict, can no longer be solved independently from one another, and cannot be anatomized in the ways that businesses are used to. The consumer is no longer the sole preoccupation of companies, as leaders now need to consider their roles as members of a society and as environmental and social change agents at the local, national and global level. Negotiating this new world disorder requires companies to more rigorously evaluate political and social events and more carefully assess the links between political, economic, social, and financial risk factors.

It is therefore no surprise that a recent RRA study of board and C-suite leaders found that only 37% of business leaders feel prepared to respond to geopolitical uncertainty. A specialized and siloed approach to problem-solving is no longer a relative competitive advantage, and a leadership model that reflects this approach – for example, relying on board members’ expertise – may be a disadvantage to companies that ultimately need to make decisions using an “outside-in” perspective.

The rise of the networked generalist

Enter the networked generalist.

Networked generalists are a subset of what RRA has defined as “sustainable leaders.” Our model of the sustainable leader (see Figure 1), identifies the attributes that define this type of leader: namely a mindset that business does not operate in a vacuum, divorced from the wider societal and environmental context in which it operates. Instead, these leaders understand that to be successful in the long term, companies must innovate and manage across commercial, societal, and environmental outcomes. When activated by a sustainable mindset, the attributes below enable leaders to champion real change within their organizations by driving to the core of organizational strategy and culture.

Figure 1: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Model of the Sustainable Leader

Source: Leadership for the Decade of Action: UN Global Compact-Russell Reynolds Associates study on the characteristics of sustainable business leaders, 2020.

Therefore, networked generalists are sustainable leaders with specific personal and professional experiences and connectivity across sectors, resulting in expertise that transcends a single industry.

Importantly, companies must not seek to replace their current ranks of specialists with networked generalists – to be sure, the value of specialized expertise remains vital to organizational success. However, companies will benefit from the leadership of networked generalists who can lead the breakdown of siloed hierarchies in support of unlocking organizational bottlenecks and serve as catalysts who foster connection, dialogue and cooperation both within and across organizational boundaries.

When combined with the leadership attributes of a sustainable leader, the experience and connectivity of the networked generalist become particularly valuable asset to companies seeking to navigate the new world disorder and the unique challenges it presents.

The Networked Generalist in Action

Consider the position of the chief executive of a multinational oil and gas company, at any given point in the last year:

The war in Ukraine has both amplified calls for an accelerated energy transition and temporarily caused the price of crude oil to skyrocket;

The lingering COVID-19 pandemic continues to complicate both supply chains and demand patterns;

National and multilateral regulatory bodies such as the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and European Commission are demanding increasingly more technical disclosures around greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors;

Rising sea levels resulting from climate change threaten much of the company’s offshore drilling infrastructure.

How should this chief executive think about addressing these – at times – contradictory macro trends? From whom should she seek input about how to adapt the company’s short and long-term strategies in response? Her executive leadership team – though highly adept at managing “within the four walls” of their company – has neither the macro perspective nor the precision of data they are accustomed to in making recommendations. Meanwhile, her board signals a reticence to make bold moves until the long-term macro trajectory becomes clearer.

Consider then how access to any one of the outside perspectives below might aid in her decision-making:

A former OECD Prime Minister and current chair of a multilateral funding platform with strong connections to regulatory decision-makers

The chair of the civil society organization establishing norms and guidance for science-based targets for carbon emissions reduction

The CEO of a major consumer goods company who has had to navigate negative public narratives about his company and industry’s labor practices and redesign the company’s supply chain to eliminate human rights abuses

Adding the perspective of the Networked Generalist to your decision-making processes

The good news: there are multiple channels through which companies can add this “outside-in” perspective of the networked generalist, whether by adding new directors to their board, appointing new leaders to their executive team, or by developing their existing talent bench with these traits in mind.

Companies seeking to incorporate networked generalists into their decision-making therefore have three potential channels through which to add this perspective:

Bringing networked generalists into your organization formally, via C-suite or board appointments

Ensuring that your organization’s professional development programs provide your leaders with the diversity of experience necessary to become networked generalists

Establishing onboarding and transition services that provide incoming leaders with the advisory perspectives of networked generalists to inform their early decision-making in role

Importantly, our research and experience have demonstrated that these attributes are “teachable;” in other words, one does not have to be born with these traits and can instead develop them over the course of personal and professional experiences.

Authors

Simon Kingston co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education Sector and is the founder of its Global Development Practice. He is based in London.

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education Sector and Sustainability Practice Knowledge teams. She is based in Portland.

Guillaume Morisset is a member of the Knowledge team for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education Sector. He is based in Boston.

The Rise of the Networked Generalist

READ THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices