Why Bad Things Happen to Good Companies: A Risk Culture Study

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why Bad Things Happen to Good Companies: A Risk Culture Study

Leadership StrategiesInclusionCulture RiskFinancial ServicesHuman Resources OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersCulture AnalyticsTeam Performance

Article

+ 2 authors

December 12, 2022

15 min

Leadership StrategiesInclusionCulture RiskFinancial ServicesHuman Resources OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersCulture AnalyticsTeam Performance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

To build a healthy risk culture, organizations must focus on behaviors, leadership messaging, and culture ownership at every level.

Close

Sean Dineen

Boston

Cynthia Dow

Stamford

Daria Rokk

Hong Kong

Alix Stuart

Boston

Amelia Stubbs

London

There’s a famous expression: “Culture is what people do when no one is looking.” Increasingly, studies suggest that what happens when no one is looking should be cause for concern. In one Russell Reynolds Associates study, 30% of financial services employees admitted that they had either breached their firm’s code of conduct, or witnessed the breach of others. Meanwhile, a number of respected brands across the automotive, retail, and technology industries have recently navigated value-destroying reputational crises, resulting in litigation and investigations. It may take years for them to recover.

These breaches are always a shock. No leader ever wants to believe that integrity, ethics, and compliance with applicable laws and regulations are anything less than foundational. All organizational cultures, of course, are a complex blend of motives and behaviors, but most leaders prefer to focus on the sunnier, more stable elements: shared values, good management practices, and consistent adherence to the articulated vision of the leadership team. What, then, should leaders do when faced with evidence – like a breach of ethics – that suggests there is more to the story?

How can leaders know what their people are truly thinking?

In the risk and controls space, it’s a question that begets more questions, including: how can leaders strike a balance between encouraging growth and maintaining the appropriate level of risk controls? How can leaders help businesses grow while maintaining company culture, both in the short and long-term? Is it possible that an organization’s culture – the patterns of behaviors across the company – can expose it to risk or prevent it from achieving its objectives? How can leaders address problems if they don’t know they exist until it’s too late? In sum, why do bad things happen to good companies?

Russell Reynolds set out to answer these questions. We interviewed over 20 chief risk, compliance, legal, and human resources officers across industries who navigated their companies through extremely challenging times. Additionally, we have executed approximately 500 searches globally across the legal, risk, regulatory, and compliance spaces over the past three years. These leaders and our market insights confirmed: understanding what people truly think, experience, and decide to do on a daily basis is critical…and elusive.

For governance and controls leaders focused on identifying culture pain points before crises hit, this paper offers the following takeaways:

Overreliance on controls and processes won’t identify risk—what’s crucial is behavior.

Defining your organization’s culture depends on who and how you ask.

Ignorance is not bliss—it’s risk.

Developing and adapting culture is everyone’s job.

First, what is culture?

At Russell Reynolds, we define culture as the shared set of assumptions held by people within an organization about who we choose to hire, how we behave, how we lead, what we reward and what we punish. It includes the tone set by leadership at the top of the organization – not just what leaders say, but what they do. It also includes the echo from the bottom – the beliefs and actions that are held and demonstrated broadly across the enterprise. Culture is the difference between an organizational chart that makes sense on paper, and the way that work really gets done. It’s also what happens when people think that no one is watching.

CEOs, chief people officers and board leaders often want to know if they have a “good culture.” It is critical to ask this question, but impossible to get a simple answer. Cultures are complex systems. Most leaders use organization-wide surveys to channel many voices into clear themes, in hopes that these themes will point towards useful action. At a minimum, these surveys are a signal to employees that their opinions matter and that they have a channel through which their perspective can be heard.

Too often, however, these survey results fail to illuminate what’s really going on in an organization. Many leaders find the results of standard measurement tools to be either –

(a)	too broad to be actionable,

(b)	more positive and encouraging than other signs would suggest, or

(c)	both.

Broad culture measurements are not able to surface the more nuanced, subtle, and systemic culture risks that can occur in pockets of an organization.

Most organizations aren’t effectively measuring or monitoring culture, so they don’t know what they don’t know.”

Controls and processes won’t identify most risk—what’s crucial is behavior

When discussing culture, leaders often seem to forget that companies are made up of individuals. And individuals never behave in just one way. Reliable people make mistakes, honest leaders become compromised, and even the hardest workers can burn out. Mitigating culture risk isn’t about plucking out one ‘bad apple’—those people are easily identifiable and, as such, easier to remove—instead, it’s about the employees who don’t intend to create risk but are exhausted, disengaged, afraid to speak up, or ignored when they do. In fact, we heard from several leaders that one of their biggest concerns was getting their boss to pay attention to risk—particularly around talent behavior and retention—earlier.

Policies should define what you reward and what you punish. Culture is the huge grey area in the middle, all of which is called ‘acceptable behavior.’”

Controls and processes won’t identify these people or the culture risk they introduce, as these effects are subtle, harder to measure, and sometimes take place over long periods of time.

Consider this example: a company invests in upgraded technology for all employees, but asks that the new devices remain in the office. This company has a non-confrontational culture, in which people are reticent to call out senior team members’ bad behavior, for fear of it affecting their growth potential. When a few people begin taking the new technology home to their personal offices, no one speaks up and no one is punished. While this specific issue is fairly low stakes, it sets a precedent that rules don’t apply to everyone, especially those that have power within an organization. Even worse, if someone does speak up and the issue remains unaddressed, this introduces doubt—what other rules are people breaking? Perhaps none of these rules actually matter.

Culture, not control mechanisms, dictate how behavior is identified and dealt with. Investigating one-off claims is not enough; leaders need to understand organizations’ weak spots—in this case, a management team who does not see the rules as applying to them—and address the underlying problem, rather than symptoms of it. Culture is dependent upon and vulnerable to the behaviors and capabilities of managers at every level, the communication style they encourage, the incentives they put in place, and the bad behaviors they let slide, either intentionally or inadvertently.

Culture is the most important thing. You can have the best controls in the world, but if your culture does not support those policies, you will fail.”

What is your organization’s risk culture? Depends who—and how—you ask

Leaders often think they have one culture. In reality, they have many.
Especially in complex, global organizations, it’s normal and expected for local “microcultures” to arise. However, this can introduce risk when each microculture operates off of a completely different rulebook. We heard from multiple interviewees that regional leaders—particularly those that are far removed from company headquarters—had a different perspective on company priorities, risks, and overall culture.

In large, global organizations, there’s often a regional divide between headquarters and the field. You’ll often hear regional leaders saying, ‘My business unit does it this way; my country has this issue.’ That’s not a bad thing, but it also doesn’t discount global rulebooks.”

Just as leaders must remember that their organizations are comprised of many different people with competing motivations, so must they remember that there are a diverse set of cultural norms that influence risk tolerance within any given region. In some jurisdictions, the compliance manual is king; in others, it’s a mere box-check to be referenced when the regulators come around; and for others, the compliance manual functions as a starting point for negotiation and is even used as a loophole for getting around other checks.

In Asia, more than in other regions, you need to emphasize learned behaviors, role modelling, and openly promoting certain behaviors, all while being careful not to berate the old behaviors, which are ‘legacy you must respect.’”

To develop a healthy risk culture, organizations need to engage in an honest dialogue about risk vs. reward at every level—and within every region—of the organization. When discussed openly and clearly role modeled, leaders can create a culture that embraces, or even celebrates, smart risk taking within the organization’s parameters and with input from controls leaders. Business leaders need to be upfront and transparent about what’s needed to support high risk/high reward situations, and empower governance and controls leaders to have a voice in early stages of said situations. This not only secures their own books of business, but also sends a message to others in the organization that getting early buy-in from controls leaders is critical to business success.

Often, leaders forget that they’re dealing with many cultures, not one. This is even more true for large, global, complex organizations.”

Ignorance is not bliss—it’s risk.

Most organizations are not monitoring or measuring culture effectively. Even if leaders utilize employee survey tools, many produce inconsistent insights, have too broad a focus, or measure the wrong things.  Often, they run the risk of confirming banalities, such as the priority placed on innovation or collaboration across an organization. They do not provide systematic insights from the different “microcultures” within the company—insights that could actually make a difference when identifying and addressing risk areas.

Controls leaders know they can’t uncover everything with a measurement survey—just the big (likely already obvious) issues. They know that minor, undiscovered issues could eventually become major problems, but there are often too many other known risks and not enough capacity to address them. Additionally, if an issue is raised and the leader does not have time to address it, they’re still responsible if a regulator catches wind. That alone is enough for these leaders to say, “Just don’t tell me.”

If your entire dashboard is green, that doesn’t mean that everything is fine—it likely means that you’re measuring the wrong things.”

While claiming ignorance is tempting, it actually opens organizations and their leaders up to even more long-term risk. Additionally, while it’s valid to be concerned about finding something problematic without resourcing to fix it, the wisest controls leaders know that everything is discoverable now. Without a clear and full view of all issues that need to be addressed, it’s impossible for leaders to correctly prioritize them.

To gain a full view of a prioritized list of problems, controls leaders can utilize more advanced behavioral diagnostics, which provide a unique approach to measurement that creates real psychological safety for survey respondents, asking sensitive questions in a manner that creates confidence in its confidentiality. In our experience, this method leads to powerful group level insights about people’s real beliefs and behaviors. This clarity has profound implications for employees, leaders, and companies. (To learn more about culture imaging, see our recent paper, “Measurement Mindset: A Practical Approach for Understanding Culture.”)

You could have the strongest compliance program in the world; but it wouldn’t matter if leaders aren’t bought in to the culture. You can’t delegate culture or compliance.”

Understanding the full cultural landscape at an organization allows leaders to proactively prioritize issues—potentially asking regulators for more time to address less dire problems—assess whether managers are upholding stated company values, and adjust messaging as needed.

A clear tone from everyone at the top is the bedrock of a healthy risk culture

When it comes to organizational culture and values, leaders can define and control the “tone at the top.” However, the “tone from above”—meaning the signals sent by an employee’s direct manager or supervisor—receives far less focus, making the “echo from the bottom” that much more elusive.

Often, organizations place the responsibility of establishing a risk culture at a select few executives’ feet. However, this is insufficient.  An undertone—or worse, explicit message—that business performance matters above all else, even doing the right thing, can reverberate through the organization with disastrous consequences.

A good controls officer should be a culture carrier, but they are not solely responsible for creating or shifting corporate culture. Instead, refining culture is the responsibility of the CEO and the entire leadership team. And maintaining it is everyone’s job.

Every leader and manager has to make explicit statements reinforcing compliance culture. People recognize if their leaders aren’t reinforcing what the company says it values.”

For permanent and ongoing change to occur, organizations need to focus on embedding culture awareness and stewardship at all levels of the organization, with a particular focus on middle management and frontline businesses. By making culture stewardship a permanent and integral part of business conduct at every level, organizations can avoid culture risk.

How to build a healthy risk culture

Revisit the messages being sent from leadership.

Examine your tone from the top: Strong controls leaders are well equipped to support an evolving culture, but if the tone from existing leaders conflicts with the compliance mandate, even world-class controls leaders are unlikely to make meaningful progress. Building alignment among the CCO, the CRO, the CEO, the C-suite, and the board will help accelerate transformation.

Consider unintended consequences: Ensure that you’ve considered how changes ripple out across an organization. When business leaders focus solely on financial gains – e.g., a new leader implementing a cost-saving initiative – they run the risk of missing appropriate change management or safety considerations. Send the message via your own actions that controls leaders should be involved in these conversations immediately.

Ensure that your incentives aren’t in conflict: Even incentives with the best intentions often have a dark side. For example, if an organization rewards on-time product delivery, but this delivery is only achieved via unethical behavior (skipping quality checks, violating worker rights, etc.), does this then become something that’s punished? This also applies to succession planning: what happens if the tyrant rainmaker is promoted into a leadership role? Leaders need to explicitly ask themselves about all potential unintended consequences of rewarding specific outcomes.

Embed open dialogue into how things get done: To understand how people are feeling, leaders need to make sure the path between them and their employees is clear. Continual, open communication helps eliminate the stigma of only speaking to the boss or the regulator when there’s a problem. By listening with intent and authenticity; challenging constructively, especially around potential disruptions like technology and AI; investing in teams and people; and, finally, putting a premium on transparency, leaders can gain a deeper understanding of their workforce.

Success is often your biggest blind spot. As soon as you reach the top, you need to wonder—what am I not being told?”

There’s a common pattern: problems stem from situations in which people who really want to get a deal done push it across the line, no matter what the consequences.”

Ensure leaders are trained and equipped to lead.

Hire controls leaders with the right competencies: Focus on hiring people who align with your organization’s purpose and values. This will help create a sense of pride in working in compliance, centering around accountability, trust, and transparency.

Ensure leaders are trained, equipped, and empowered to lead: Controls leaders should have influence with the CEO, and the entire C-suite should be a part of maintaining and role modeling their company’s risk culture. It also helps to be explicit about control leaders’ decision rights and role clarity, which is often a huge source of risk. This ensures that the right things are being escalated and that decisions—and their consequences—are owned by the right people.

If you hire individuals that look or act the same way, they will usually all make the same mistake or miss the same flags. To be effective, you need varying views and backgrounds. Different people see different things.”

Measure culture specifically and accurately.

Ask the right people the right questions: Consider tapping into recent advancements in culture measurement that evaluate how leaders act and what people believe, utilize unique question formats that check for specific issues, and reveal hard truths about an organization.

Build a culture of psychological safety: Culture is continued reinforcement – to be truly balanced, continually promote an environment that encourages employees to speak up, escalate issues, and share feedback without fear of retribution. Bullying management styles must not be tolerated.

Don’t over-rely on tools: There is no one size fits all solution. Instead, look to a range of data sources for early warning signs of organizational stress–equipment failures or other resource gaps, overly aggressive business targets, “mosquito bite” complaints about minor isolated annoyances that only spell trouble in the aggregate.

Culture is continued reinforcement – be balanced and thoughtful when people come to you with issues. If you encourage this behavior, you can truly know what’s happening.”

Authors

Gretchen Anderson leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Culture capability. She is based in New York.

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.

Sean Dineen is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in Boston.

Cynthia Dow leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers capability. She is based in Boston.

Daria Rokk leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Legal, Regulatory, Compliance and Risk capability in APAC. She is based in Hong Kong.

Harsonal Sachar leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers and Legal, Risk & Compliance Officers capabilities. She is based in Toronto.

Alix Stuart is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. She is based in Boston.

Amelia Stubbs leads the Risk & Controls practice in Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services industry. She is based in London.

Ellen Yaffe leads the Risk Management practice for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services industry and is a member of its Legal, Regulatory and Compliance Officers practice. She is based in New York.

Why Bad Things Happen to Good Companies

A Risk Culture Study

Download here

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices