What Tech’s Best Leaders are Doing to Sustain Growth and Profitability During an Economic Downturn | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Tech’s Best Leaders are Doing to Sustain Growth and Profitability During an Economic Downturn

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Article

Tuck Rickards

March 30, 2023

3 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Focusing on profitability while sustaining growth requires more prioritization and rigor, especially in go-to-market and product.

Close

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

The technology industry is at a critical inflection point in its history as former standards of success are re-evaluated and re-defined. “Growth at all costs” is out—but are the technology businesses that were built according to those rules ready to adopt the new playbook of sustainable growth that prioritizes profitable margins?

We sought an insider’s perspective to better understand how some household name technology companies and leaders are making this pivot. Tuck Rickards, managing director at Russell Reynolds Associates and co-leader of the company’s Core and Growth Technology Practice, says that when faced with a confluence of imperatives—balancing growth and scaling; maximizing efficiency amid more scrutiny of profitability; and making necessary cost adjustments to appease investors and boards—those who have found the most success are turning to tighter operations and a smarter go-to-market approach, and ensuring they have the right leadership team in place.

In a recent survey of nearly 185 technology leaders conducted by Russell Reynolds Associates, nearly two-thirds asserted that optimizing the business portfolio and retaining critical talent are the keys to winning during the current downturn. Another half touted the importance of implementing cost-cutting measures (not including workforce reductions), while simultaneously investing in digital and technologies to boost operational efficiency. “The best internet and technology companies today grew through tough market environments,” says Rickards. “It’s really a question of how you prioritize growth opportunities, and how you get more efficient in everything that you do.” Importantly, “Reaching profitability is not the finish line,” he says. “It’s sustaining growth over an enduring period and making smart investments, while producing more profitable margins.”

What have Rickards’ CEO and board clients told him about how they are pivoting in alignment with these new expectations? “There are two strategies we’re hearing consistently, from both public and private companies, about optimizing their core business,” Rickards says. “One, to tighten up their go-to-market strategy. Companies are connecting the dots between sales, marketing, and customer success by introducing more efficiency, operationality, and consistency to improve margins, yet generate a cycle of enduring growth. That is imperative to being a modern, well-run, efficient technology company.”

The other strategy Rickards and his colleagues hear often is the need to prioritize products that have a clear vision and strategy. “Most companies have had a number of ‘bets,’ where they have a core product as well as multiple adjacent products,” he says. “They’ve had a lot of experiments, acquisitions that they’ve not integrated. There is a huge push from investors around focusing in on two or three things that could be strategic, and very additive.” In other words, these companies are now making more deliberate choices to focus on top-line growth and ROI while putting additional scrutiny on the payoff of riskier long-term plays.

Many of these difficult strategic growth decisions hinge on reshaping the C-suite. Rickards advises clients to ask themselves: “Do we have the right people in place?” Teams that were previously oriented towards “growth at all costs” must now assess every functional leader and ask, “Do our leaders have the right mindsets, skill sets, and dynamic for successfully reinventing our strategic agenda?”

Ultimately, Rickards says, companies must have the right talent “to complement a more visionary CEO, and to get stuff done. That’s where the specific needs are.”

For teams that can be both operationally minded and pragmatic, Rickards says, this economic downturn will impart important lessons, but ultimately be merely another part of the boom-and-bust cycles of today’s market writ large. “The folks who have been through it before, successfully, are not panicking,” he says. “These CEOs know they have to make tough cost decisions, but ultimately view a recession as an opportunity—perhaps not one they sought out, but one that still offers benefits, lessons, and the prospect of reinvention.”

In real time, we are witnessing an evolving playbook for profitable growth as companies wade through this difficult market environment. Ultimately, bold leadership will be required to effectively balance sustainable, profitable growth against key investments in products, processes and people.

Authors

Tuck Rickards leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice and is an Executive Board member at Fast Company. He is based in San Francisco.

This article was originally published by Fast Company.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices