Leaders are losing confidence in their executive teams. Here’s why. | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Leaders Are Losing Confidence In Their Executive Teams. Here’s Why

LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionCEO SuccessionTeam Performance

Article

January 19, 2023

6 min

LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionCEO SuccessionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Leaders’ confidence in their executive teams—their capabilities, behavior and management of critical issues—has fallen. We explore why.

Close

Since the onset of COVID, many leaders proved their ability to overcome obstacles and confidently steer into the unknown. Yet, as we now settle into a new normal and a new economic reality, is this resilience now running out?

Our new Leadership Confidence Index shows leaders’ confidence in their executive leadership teams (ELT)—their capabilities, how they manage critical issues, and how they behave—has trended downwards between early 2021 and the end of 2022—falling 4.9 points.

A closer examination of the data, comparing the responses of CEOs, other C-suite leaders, next-generation leaders, and board directors, reveals three key findings. All have important leadership implications.

CEO confidence takes a big hit.

CEO confidence in the ELT has seen the sharpest fall, driven in part by CEO concerns about executives’ readiness to embrace the opportunities of tech transformation and sustainability.

Team dynamics and behavior a top concern.

Leaders are increasingly skeptical about how well the ELT works together as a team, embraces change, and role models the right culture.

Next-generation leaders at risk.

Next-generation leaders have the lowest levels of confidence in the ELT, creating retention and succession risk for organizations.

Methodology—How we track leadership confidence

The Leadership Confidence Index captures the view of CEOs, C-suite leaders, next-generation leaders (those 1-2 levels below the C-suite), and board directors on the effectiveness of the executive leadership team (ELT) at their organization across three constructs:

Capability. Does the ELT: have the right capability to lead the organization successfully; a strong grasp of competitive dynamics in their industry; access to the right information to support decision making; and receive good advice and input from the supervisory board?

Behavior. Does the ELT work together effectively as a team; effectively embrace change; and role model the right culture and behaviors?

Issue management. Does the ELT: effectively embrace the opportunities of digital transformation; effectively embrace the opportunities of ESG; have a successful strategy for leadership succession at the C-level; implement practices to improve diversity, equity, and inclusion?

Responses to these items are combined into an overall Leadership Confidence Index on a 100-point scale, as well as a sub-index on each of the three constructs.

CEO confidence takes a big hit

Who CEOs surround themselves with has big implications for organizational performance. Clearly, CEOs need confidence that their top team has what it takes to drive the business forward, make smart decisions, and successfully navigate existing and emerging threats.

Unfortunately, our index shows CEO confidence in the ELT has fallen sharply between early 2021 and late 2022 down from 74.2 to 65.7 (an 8.5 point drop). This is the biggest confidence decline across all leaders we measured (boards, CEOs, C-suite, and next-generation leaders).

CEOs are losing confidence in their executive teams

Leadership Confidence Index - CEOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Q2 2021 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,327 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors; Q2 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,590 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors; Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,690 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors

CEO confidence is down across all three of the constructs we measure—executive capability, executive team behavior, and how the executive team tackles critical issues.

The largest decline is on issue management (10.7 points), with CEOs particularly concerned about the ability of the ELT to embrace the opportunities of digital and ESG.

As CEOs face a more constrained economic context, the ability of the ELT to embrace change, and drive forward digital and sustainability initiatives will be key to resilience and success.

Digital transformation and sustainable leadership are not set-and-forget processes. They require long-term prioritization, monitoring, and intervention from the top. We know that the most successful organizations focus heavily on thorny issues like these, even in times of volatility and uncertainty.

Does your leadership team have the necessary skills and experience to capture opportunities in 2023?

Leadership team behaviors and dynamics a top concern

The way senior executives behave has critical implications for team cohesion and culture—and their ability to lead the organization and its people. Whether an executive leadership team pulls together or pulls apart determines whether or not an organization can meet its strategic objectives and deliver stand-out performance.

Yet it appears the strain of leading in a hybrid world, the multi-dimensional nature of goals in an era of stakeholder capitalism, and new economic pressures mean that many leadership teams are starting to fray at the edges.

Across all leaders, confidence in ELT behavior declined 8 points between H1 2021 and H2 2022, with CEOs and next-generation leaders reporting the biggest falls.

In our index, our measure of ELT behavior focuses on how well executives work together as a team, how well they role model the right behaviors, and how well they embrace change.

Interestingly, even C-suite leaders themselves, who make up the executive leadership team, are growing increasingly pessimistic about ELT behavior.

CEOs and next-generation leaders saw the biggest falls in confidence in ELT behaviors

Confidence in ELT Behavior - by role

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Q2 2021 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,327 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors; Q2 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,590 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors; Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,690 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors

To succeed, CEOs must effectively conduct the executive leadership team—and this is both a matter of deploying their individual skillsets and expertise and ensuring they function together as a cohesive unit.

How are you creating strategic alignment and cultural cohesion within your leadership team?

Next-generation leaders at risk

Organizations need strong succession pipelines to create collective resilience, agility, and depth of leadership. This is not just about hiring next-generation leaders with future-oriented skills and experience. It is about engaging, retaining and developing them, too.

In our index, next-generation leaders’ confidence in their ELT remained relatively stable into H1 2022 but has fallen notably in H2 2022. It is now down 5.6 points since 2021.

In particular, next-generation leaders are growing concerned about ELT behavior (down 8 points) and how the ELT is managing critical issues (down 7.8 points).

Next-gen leader confidence in ELT behavior and issue management falling fast

Leadership Confidence Index - Next-Generation Leaders

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ Q2 2021 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,327 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors; Q2 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,590 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors; Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,690 CEOs, C-level leaders, next-generation leaders, and non-executive board directors

Our research shows that next-generation leaders, who sit one or two levels below the C-suite and are typically tasked with executing the strategy that comes from the ELT, are growing concerned about how the leaders above them role model behaviors, operate as a team, and manage change.

Their current confidence levels are a red flag for engagement and retention, creating a real risk for C-suite succession planning.

How are you working to engage and develop your next-generation leaders?

Where next? How to ensure you have the right leadership team in place

With the tumultuous economic and social times that lie ahead for many organizations, it is critical that CEOs think carefully about the capability and culture of their executive team. This includes identifying any emerging gaps in skillsets, forensically reviewing succession pipelines, ensuring an engaged and productive culture, and keeping a careful watch on how they can best ensure their business is able to adapt to new changes and dynamics.

Three critical questions CEOs should be asking themselves to better understand the quality of their organization’s leadership team:

Does your leadership team have the necessary skills and experience to capture opportunities in 2023?

How are you creating strategic alignment and cultural cohesion within your leadership team?

How are you working to engage and develop your next-generation leaders?

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we can help your organization to succeed by:

Identifying and investing in the right leaders for your C-suite using our decades of executive search experience

Carefully examining the capabilities of your existing C-suite and benchmarking them against the current market

Carrying out executive assessments which look at how your executive team lead and their likely impact, their strengths, and areas for improvement

Psychometric testing to look for positive leadership traits and any potential behavioral derailers

To get a deeper understanding of the capabilities of your C-suite and uncover which gaps you need to plug, request a consultation with one of our C-suite success experts.

Leaders Are Losing Confidence In Their Executive Teams. Here’s Why

Download full report

Author

Tom Handcock, Managing Director of the Center for Leadership Insight conducted the analysis and authored this report.

Learn more about the author and Center for Leadership Insight

The author wishes to thank the thousands of leaders from RRA’s global network who responded to the Global Leadership Monitor over the last 2 years. Their responses to the survey have contributed greatly to our understanding of leadership in 2022 and beyond.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices