Effectively Communicating Sustainability Goals | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Effectively Communicating Sustainability Goals

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

Article

July 22, 2022

9 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Organizations are under growing pressure to communicate the concrete actions they’re taking to hit their sustainability goals.

Close

Companies today face an increasingly complicated ESG landscape, balancing differing and occasionally conflicting needs and interests of multiple stakeholder groups. They also face a diverse array of sustainability issues and must effectively prioritize goals to make progress in any one area.

With today’s globally digital landscape, there is more pressure on companies to be transparent and communicate their goals and progress clearly, and more ability to make stories and experiences heard, whether to highlight ESG leaders, or bring attention to organizational practices that need updating.

Bridging the gap between organizational strategy and stakeholders

Companies need to incorporate ESG goals into their organizational strategy while also ensuring that they are effectively communicating progress against these goals to stakeholders. Environmental protection, climate change, employee well-being, social issues, economic inequality, and regulatory guidelines are all at the forefront of business priorities. What that means for individual companies varies across region, industry, and size, but the importance of proactively addressing these issues applies to all. To ensure they are prepared to respond, companies should consider the following three principles.

Build transparency

Clearly define your company’s strategy for supporting ESG issues

Get comfortable with being uncomfortable

Building transparency

Get specific

Committing to short and long-term sustainability goals is an important first step for companies investing in ESG. However, organizations need to move beyond announcing support to clearly communicating plans, progress, and specific actions taken.

This will help secure buy-in from internal and external stakeholders, and create an accountability mechanism. Additionally, transparency on your part helps set the standard for others in your industry.

Use your platform authentically

Companies can support change without becoming “movement organizations" that said, it is crucial for them to commit to progress, especially when it seems difficult.

Ensure that your organization's public positions are supported by stated company values, as well as your private actions. It’s better to say nothing than make a statement that is inconsistent with your values or practices.

Case in Point: Nestlé

Decreasing carbon emissions and prioritizing environmental protection in supply chain

Nestlé is committed to reducing their carbon footprint and halving their greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, as well as reducing waste, protecting natural forests, promoting an eco-friendly water cycle and sustainably sourcing raw materials. They have set a net-zero date for 2050.

To keep stakeholders informed, Nestlé publicly announces their progress towards these goals and publishes an annual report on their progress, including a space for the public to submit information raising compliance concerns. They have made this information easily available, are transparent in communicating their goals, and are tackling many facets of ESG issues, including environmental, human rights and community building, and compliance and reporting.

Source: Nestlé

Clearly defining your company’s strategy for supporting ESG issues

Remember that change starts from within

Stake out a suite of issues that will make a difference to your stakeholders, particularly employees.

It’s not enough to advocate externally for your chosen cause – focus on the change that can be made within your four walls, for example, ending relationships with suppliers or partners that do not align with company values.

Help others hold you accountable

Measure: Benchmark your company’s current practices using external tools such as the Leed certification or WHO, then continue to measure your KPIs.

Reward: Create and communicate incentives for supporting environmental protection, diversity, equity and inclusion, and compliance best practices. Consider linking ESG outcomes to executive compensation and recognition practices.

Enforce: Unenforced values have no meaning; create a culture that encourages speaking up when someone’s behavior contradicts company values.

Case in Point: CVS Health

Making health and wellbeing initiatives accessible to all

A 2022 winner of the Best Employers: Excellence in Health & Well-being Award from nonprofit organization Business Group on Health, CVS Health leads in the health and well-being space for their employees.

Their 2021 success KPIs included:

Over 70% of colleagues are women and 48%+ colleagues identify as racially diverse

Over $3.5 billion spent with small businesses and diverse suppliers

Committed to increasing hourly minimum wage across enterprise to $15 by July 2022

Over 15 million hours of training and development completed, including compliance training and new leadership development course

They have made progress in this by communicating their progress each year in the “Healthy Business” section of their annual ESG report, detailing their employee well-being programs that align with their organizational foundation as a health company for the public.

Source: CVS Health

Getting comfortable with being uncomfortable

Strap in for a long and complicated journey

Be patient—tangible results require stamina, vulnerability, willingness to listen and learn, and relentless commitment to change.

Set long-term goals with interim benchmarks, and have open, honest conversations with critical stakeholders along the way.

Ensure your leadership team is aligned around your corporate values, and let those be your “True North”

When sudden issues emerge, a company’s values the North Star for navigating the issue and deciding if and how to effectively respond.

To effectively engage on sustainability issues, start by identifying your company's unique differentiators or areas of comparative advantage, then leverage them to maximize social and financial value (for example, a global logistics company using its proprietary expertise to help governments coordinate disaster relief).

Case in Point: Ingersoll Rand

Driving compliance and ethics to see quick and effective results

In 2021, industrial tech company Ingersoll Rand was named the best compliance and ethics program in large cap markets by Corporate Secretary at the Corporate Governance Awards. They created and finished their program in under a year during the pandemic, highlighting that the crucial speed of progress is attainable, even for large companies.

“Just one year and nine months ago, we combined two industry-leading companies, transforming us into a single global force,” said Robert Mayfield, director of global compliance of Ingersoll Rand. “Simply pushing a transformation like this over the finish line is a huge accomplishment. Standing up an effective compliance and ethics program, seemingly overnight, and then being recognized for that achievement is an entirely different feat that took a tremendous amount of discipline, thoughtfulness, and focus.”

Source: Ingersoll Rand

Further Reading

ESG 2.0 - The Next Generation of Leadership

How to Develop Sustainable Leadership Acumen

Assessing and Selecting Sustainable Leaders

Authors

Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.

Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Sustainability practices. She is based in Portland.

T.R. Straub is a consultant on the Legal, Regulatory, Compliance & Risk team. He is based in Washington, D.C.

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices