Building the future of electric-vehicle charging infrastructure | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Building the future of electric-vehicle charging infrastructure

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationLeadershipIndustrialSustainability Officers

Article

November 22, 2022

5 min

Sustainable LeadershipTechnology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationLeadershipIndustrialSustainability Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Taking a business to market leader status and what the future holds for electric cars.

Close

Chris Nicholson

London

Abigail Skerrett

London

An interview with Lex Hartman

As part of our Energy Matters series we speak to Lex Hartman, energy and power utilities expert and former CEO of ubitricity, about taking the company to market leader status and what the future holds for electric cars.

What prompted you to leave a successful corporate role at TenneT to join ubitricity, which was a scaleup company?

I held several roles in the Dutch-German transmission system operator TenneT, and served as a Managing Director there for 10 years before joining ubitricity. This could have been considered a strange career move at the time, going from leading a large corporate to a scaleup company with only 70 full time employees. There were two main reasons I did this: one personal and one professional. On the personal side, after having led a big, monopolist company for some time it felt right to help lead a smaller, younger company. This was valuable to them, to give them the benefit of my experience, but also hugely valuable to me – it got me out of my comfort zone and I learnt a great deal in a dynamic, competitive market.

On the business side, the trigger for me was that not many companies, politicians or stakeholders have an integrated view of what is happening with energy and mobility. We know now that electric cars are coming; in fact millions of them coming. This has been made possible by renewable energy. However, if we do not optimise the charging infrastructure, through organisation and investment, there will not be a successful integration between energy and mobility and the technology will not actually work. We need to ensure that renewable energy capacity can cope with the demand that electric cars will bring, which is something that can be achieved by the energy system working in conjunction with the mobility system. My understanding of how to build this infrastructure was a driver for me joining ubitricty.

How did you help ubitricity achieve market leading status in the UK, which led to its purchase by Shell?

There is a lot of buzz around the idea of ‘fast charging’ in the electric vehicle world, but the vast majority of charging events are through regular charging at home or work, or on the streets. ubitricity provides lamp post charging on the streets, particularly in cities where people are less likely to have a driveway or garage to be able to charge on. The lamp post charging points give users the opportunity to charge directly outside their homes. This was the niche that ubitricity built its success on.

To ensure electric vehicles are a success, this infrastructure in any given country needs to be expanded so there are more sockets than cars. We also need to ensure the whole process of charging is extremely simple for consumers. It needs to become more convenient and, of course, affordable.  Then there is the development of fast charging, which will be crucial in the future, as customers become more demanding.

Becoming market leaders in the UK was the company’s first success, and in the last phase of my leadership the shareholders sold the company to Shell, which was tremendous. This was such a big strategic play, and as part of Shell the company will be able to achieve more, globally.

Is it a challenge to attract the required level of investment in this sector?

You need to have a long term vision with this market – you have to look to the next five to 10 years rather than looking at how things are at this very moment. We are talking about a future, in every country, with millions of sockets in homes, offices, supermarkets, airports and on streets, which requires the necessary infrastructure. This infrastructure is reliant on investment now, and it can be a challenge to attract this. It is about understanding that once this matures and the infrastructure is in place, there will be a fantastic base for recurring revenues, and this is the attractive part for investors.

How would you compare working within a large corporate in this sector to working in a smaller entrepreneurial scaleup?

When I first moved from my corporate role to ubitricity, I have to admit I found many of the differences very refreshing. The level of control and bureaucracy involved in a large corporate is extensive: the processes that you need to follow in terms of compliance, safety, human resources come to actually define the business, and they do eat up management time. A smaller company does not have this to the same degree and so is much more agile and able to make fast decisions, explore different directions and use the brains of its people to come up with new ideas. Despite this, after a few weeks I was starting to miss the controls of the bigger company. That is because all the processes and policies help a company to plan and implement its strategies effectively, to comply with their customers’ wants and needs, and to know what is happening and when.

I think the key to this is finding the right balance. A large corporate is like a tanker and needs to be secure and stable to maintain a steady speed, but we also need the smaller, agile ‘speedboat’ companies that can move quickly and keep up with market changes. If a company can combine both elements to remain nimble but bring on enough of the requisite processes and controls to ensure its stability and give it the power to move forward, that can be a fantastic recipe for success.

What advice would you give an entrepreneur looking to scale their business without introducing too much complexity so it remains fit for purpose?

I would say get the right people on board. As well as capital, any successful business needs the right mix of human beings. It is important to have innovators and entrepreneurs to drive the business, but if a company gets from start up to scale up it needs to grow very fast, and it will need to implement the processes and policies necessary to allow it to function at scale. Customers will require a certain level of professionality, and expect ISO certification. Internally, the business will require an effective HR function, to give but one example. To achieve these types of requirements, you need people on board with the right capabilities in management and at all levels of the business.

You mentioned that you are an investor in this space. Looking forward, what do you think are the most interesting investment themes across mobility and electrification?

Yes, I am combining advising companies with having skin in the game, which is a good mixture. I am not currently investing in charging infrastructure, not because that I do not believe in that but because I am doing different things now. My focus is on society’s biggest challenges, and I think one of these is the transition to a carbon free world. We need a carbon free energy source that can power the whole world, with energy needs that continue to rise as countries develop. We are in this transition phase, but we do not yet know where this transition phase leads. Hydrogen is not the answer, because it is a carrier rather than a source, and many countries want to avoid nuclear. I am involved in new technologies such as laser fusion and solar flexibilities. So, I am stepping back from proven, established investment returns and supporting the early stages of the next wave of technology change, which is so desperately needed.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices