Planning for Tomorrow’s Public Company CFO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Planning for Tomorrow’s Public Company CFO

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerEducationFinancial ServicesGovernmentHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyProfessional ServicesFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionInclusion and CultureDevelopment and Transition

Article

August 09, 2022

7 min

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerEducationFinancial ServicesGovernmentHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyProfessional ServicesFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionInclusion and CultureDevelopment and Transition

Executive summary

Over the past decade, the public company CFO remit has rapidly evolved. Stay abreast of hiring trends and develop your finance talent for tomorrow's CFO.

Close

Linda Barham

Chicago

Esmeralda (Ezzy) Popo

Chicago

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

Over the past decade, the public company CFO remit has rapidly evolved beyond the traditional financial scope to include operational and strategic responsibilities. To stay abreast and develop your finance talent as the role continues to evolve, understanding tomorrow’s CFO is paramount.

To better understand the current state of the role and hiring implications, Russell Reynolds Associates recently analyzed the backgrounds, career paths, and tenures of S&P 500 CFOs (N = 500).1 Based on our findings, we identify three important trends in how CFO appointments have evolved over the years, as the war for talent continues.

High turnover leads to an extremely active market

Recent strides have been made in promoting women CFOs

The S&P 500 landscape is shifting towards strategically-oriented CFOs

Finally, we also review key considerations for CEOs, Boards, and CFOs as they continue to hire and develop their finance talent.

1. An active CFO market has companies forgoing traditional requirements

Over half of S&P 500 CFOs were hired into their role within the past three years. This high churn rate is the result of many factors, including a frothy IPO market in 2021 that significantly increased the number of public company CFO opportunities, as well as overall strong equity performance that allowed some to retire earlier.2  While recent market slowdowns have slightly cooled the war for talent, increasing retirement rates and the ongoing search for talent from historically unrepresented minority groups, point to a CFO market that is far from stagnant3 (To read more about CFO turnover in 2022, see our latest research.)

Recent turnover3 led many organizations to develop internal CFO talent, resulting in the majority of CFOs being first-time in role. The average role tenure decreased from 5.6 years in 2020 to 4.2 in 2022 (Figure 1).

Figure 1. S&P 500 Hiring Trends

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022, N=500

Tight talent markets have led to a significant increase in first-time CFOs, leaving many considering whether previous CFO experience is necessary.

2. External women hires in finance remains a challenge

Increased focus on gender diversity combined with high CFO turnover has created more opportunities for women. The majority of current women CFOs were promoted into their role within the past three years, with 36% of women CFOs joining within the past year, compared to 22% of men CFOs. These recent strides bring the total percentage of women CFOs on the S&P 500 to 16%.

There is not a significant gap between women and men who are in their first CFO role. However, more women are being promoted internally, showcasing how succession planning can pay off for increasing gender diversity (Figure 2.)

Figure 2. Distribution of Women vs Men CFOs (Internal vs External Hires)

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022, N=500

Lessons can still be learned from leading industries and companies that are promoting and developing women in finance. Certain industries have greater CFO gender diversity than others (Figure 3.) The technology industry leads the way with almost 2x more women in the role than the Healthcare and Industrial & Natural Resources (INR) industries. Those leading the way in addressing gender parity are investing in succession planning, as exhibited by increased internal promotions.

Figure 3. Women CFOs by Industry (Internal vs External Hires)

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022, n = 80

3. Current state CFO DNA prioritizes operations versus accounting

As organizations fight to retain CFO talent and look to the CFO as a potential CEO successor, the CFO mandate is broadening,4 requiring CFOs to have business acumen and a strategic and operations orientation. In the last 10 years, there’s been a dramatic shift away from accounting, controls, and audit backgrounds to those who are more operational and strategic, usually from a finance operations or divisional CFO archetype (Figure 4.)

Figure 4. Trending role prior to first CFO role by CFO tenure

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022, N = 500

*Finance Operations includes VP/SVP/EVP Finance, Deputy/Divisional CFO, and FP&A roles

Those recruiting externally have the opportunity to engage with a broader range of experiences and tend to focus more on this operational archetype (Figure 5.), while those looking internally are more open to candidates from traditional finance backgrounds, such as accounting and treasury. One explanation for the difference in archetypes is the availability of operational finance roles within the organization. Larger-scale organizations likely have this talent pool to recruit from, whereas smaller-scale organizations are less likely to include roles like division CFO.

Figure 5. Internal versus External Role Prior to First CFO Role

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022, N = 500

*Finance Operations includes VP/SVP/EVP Finance, Deputy/Divisional CFO, and FP&A roles

An unprecedented CFO market requires unique solutions

- In a tight market, consider being open-minded when it comes to prior CFO experience. The majority of CFOs are promoted internally and companies without adequate bench strength need to consider whether previous CFO experience is necessary. Companies are already taking this approach — within the first half of 2022, of newly appointed CFOs, 79% are in the role for the first time (Figure 6.). This is a record number and indicative of an extremely active CFO market and robust succession planning.

Figure 6. Trending Internal versus External Appointments of New CFOs

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022, n = 189

- Internal development is key for increasing women representation in finance. Take note from other industry leaders and develop women in finance. With many women being first-time in the role, the number of experienced women CFOs is limited (Figure 7.) By developing internally, companies can avoid over-fishing in a limited talent pool.

Figure 7. CFO Talent Pool

Source: RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022, N = 500

*In role for more than 3 years

- Operational CFOs are the new accounting CFOs. With increasing importance being placed on operational and strategic experience amongst CFOs,  ensure finance operations and business acumen are key competencies—whether looking externally or developing your finance team internally. Think both long-term and mid-term to imbed these competencies:

Mid-term solution: Consider the placement of these roles within the finance organizational structure. Often division CFO or vice president of finance roles aren’t viewed at the same seniority as roles such as Chief Accounting Officer. Evaluate your organizational structure and ensure they are appropriately senior.

Long-term solution: Create more junior early career opportunities for traditional finance backgrounds (accounting, audit, tax, and treasury) in FP&A, division CFO, and vice president of finance roles. If there isn’t company scale to embed these roles early on, rebrand operational and strategic roles as coveted developmental tours, so there is the opportunity to hold a vice president of finance, division CFO, or division CEO role before becoming CFO.

In an active market, reconsider what experiences are truly necessary for tomorrow’s CFO, especially when looking externally.

References

RRA analysis of CFOs at S&P 500 companies as of 06/30/2022

RRA ‘2021: The year of CFO turnover and strides in gender diversity’, 2021

RRA ‘CFO Turnover in 2022 Slows, But Don’t Expect it to Stay’, 2022

Wall Street Journal, ‘Companies Broaden CFOs’ Responsibilities to Retain Them In Strong Job Market’, 2022

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Americas Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Chicago.
Esmeralda Popo is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Chicago.
Catherine Schroeder is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Financial Officers Practice Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices