Value Creation and the Role of the CFO in India | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Value Creation and the Role of the CFO in India

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Article

January 25, 2023

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipFinance OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Executive summary

Companies that have an eye on profitability and a strong management team are likely to see success in the long term.

Close

Vinita Katara

Mumbai
New Delhi

Rahul Thapar

Mumbai
New Delhi

Background

Russell Reynolds Associates hosted an in-person event with senior chief  financial  officers from a variety of industries. The discussion focused on the role of the CFO in high-growth companies in India, where  founders have a single minded agenda of value creation. The discussion revolved around the following key questions:

Most organizations' approach towards value creation, especially with regards  to IPOs

The makings of a successful IPO and common pitfalls to be aware of

The role of a CFO in value creation

The investor perspective on the role of the CFO in creating and sustaining value

Organizations' approach towards value creation

Companies today operate in a very different environment than they used to a few years ago. There is an exponential increase in PE/ VC investing.

Most organizations are grappling with a different set of goals between the founders and the investors. The investors have a five to seven year view on the company's growth and therefore gearing towards their exit agenda, their drivers are quite different from those of the founders, who typically have a much longer term view.

Most investors wanted to ride India's 2019-2020 growth wave. Despite the large number of IPOs during this time, this growth wave was temporary--as was the value most companies created during this time.

For companies aiming for IPOs, their values can only be maintained if there is sustained growth and execution after the listing. Companies that have an eye on profitability and a strong management team are likely to see success  in the long term, resulting in a strong IPO performance.

The "four Ps" approach for evaluating an organization's value creation potential

Once the "Four Ps" are understood, a company's likelihood of becoming profitable in the long run greatly increases.

Agile planning has also become increasingly important. Being extremely rigid when planning for the future is dangerous and futile, especially when a company is still in its nascent stages. Changing  plans often also creates a stressful environment for employees, which is detrimental to the company's performance. In order to ensure longevity, it is necessary to factor in flexibility when planning for the future.

The last but most important cog in the value creation wheel is customer retention.  Many companies today focus on customer acquisition. In the era of demonstrating quick growth in order  to boost valuation, many companies pay more attention to acquiring as many customers as possible in a short time span. This is however only a bubble, because without a strategy to retain the customers, it is almost impossible to sustain growth. Hence, true value is only created when customers are retained for the long haul, and robust retention strategies are in place.

A common pitfall companies face is when they enter into new domains and products simply  to follow  their market competitors. This can harm the value and innate purpose of the company if the core capabilities of the firm do not yet support these new ventures. Companies therefore need to be prudent and apply good judgement before launching new products/lines of business.

The makings of a successful IPO and some common pitfalls

The top reasons that help - or hinder - an IPO's success

As discussed previously, a successful IPO is one where sustainable growth is maintained long after the company goes public.

In the recent past, there has been a surge in capital consuming companies, due to the free and cheap cash flow globally. Such companies have not demonstrated their long-term profitability. The lack of a sustainable outlook and long term thinking have resulted in such companies having unsuccessful IPOs, as investors, especially those in India, are indexed towards skepticism.

IPOs can also be unsuccessful when the goal of the promoter/ senior management is to walk away with the cash without investing it in back in the business.

A major pitfall that companies should avoid is opting for an IPO simply because other firms in the industry are doing the same. If a company is a cash burner, investors may not have confidence in its long-term success. When such companies opt for IPOs due to the fear of missing out, this usually results in unsuccessful IPOs.
New-age, fast-growing companies might become cash burners if they opt for debt very early on in their lifecycle. This choice is typically made when there is fear of the equity drying up fast. However, bringing in debt is only beneficial once the business model is efficient and sustainable. When companies bring in debt prematurely and go public soon afterwards, there is limited investor confidence in the company’s ability to perform in the long run.

It is therefore the CFO’s role to provide critical advice to the promoters about when to opt for debt.

Role of the CFO in value Creation

The CFO’s role today has changed from being a business  partner alone –providing financial analysis  and insights- to taking on a greater involvement in supporting and developing strategy as well as guiding key business initiatives. Talking about value creation, the CFO is not only guiding the success of an IPO but also charting the long term success of the organization in conjunction with the founders.

It has become evident that companies with sustainable business models also tend to undergo successful  IPOs. When CFOs are able to successfully communicate a company's strong financial metrics to the market, it increases investor confidence, leading to a successful IPO. It is also critical that companies don't view IPOs as a single event that they need to make a success, as sustainability and further listing price improvements are equally important to the organization's financial health.

Often, in PE-backed companies, there is a power struggle between the firm and the founder, both of whom  have differing goals. In such cases, the role of the CFO is of paramount importance, as the CFO thinks about the business objectives dispassionately and with a longer term view. Equally, s/he works towards balancing the "ask" of the founder and the Investor and builds alignment towards strategy in order to achieve the long term goals. In a world where there is an increasing number of PE backed  firms, the CFO’s facilitator has become much more prominent and key to a company’s longevity.

CFOs also play a crucial role in advising promoters against opting for debt prematurely when unit economics are poor, as this can have a negative effect on the company's IPO, as well as its lifespan.

When CFOs are viewed as a "co-founder" and key part of the strategy team, rather than a business partner, the lines distinguishing a CFO from the CEO tend to blur and the CFO is seen as a key strategy contributor.

In order to create a robust business, the CFO plays a key part in allocating capital to the right areas, balancing objectives and rationalizing resources. Maintaining capital efficiency is therefore a key part in the CFO’s role, especially in non-discretionary businesses, such as the education space, where maintaining good unit economics is prerequisite.

Strategic thinking is becoming  a key part of the CFO’s role today. Additionally, rationalizing goals with the promoter group/ PE firm and developing tactical solutions is an increasing part of the CFO's job. When the CFO is able to demonstrate their ability to hold the firm's strategy steady, the promoters and CEO become  increasingly comfortable with the CFO owning a wider range of activities within the company.

The Russell Reynolds Associates' perspective:

The CFO's role continues to shift, due to the wide gamut of responsibilities they take on, as well as increasing demands from investors. At Russell  Reynolds, we have seen CFO competencies evolve over time.

As CFOs begin to be viewed as key strategy contributors, rather than operators, the qualities they possess have started to span the entire Leadership SpanTM (to learn more about Russell Reynolds’ Leadership SpanTM, read our article on the science of C-suite success). Being both heroic and able to galvanize  teams are key attributes of executive leaders; however, these qualities were not previously associated with CFOs. For example, being able to provide confidence to investors about company performance is a form of galvanizing and motivating people in the environment. In helping set strategy, CFOs are now viewed as spanning the model, being pragmatic and prudent when advising promoters while also being disruptive, as this quality is vital to survive in the new age.

Therefore, the innate CFO leadership DNA has also begun to evolve, as CFOs adapt to their larger remits and position as one of the key contributors to a company's achievements and growth. This translates to sustainable value creation and financial performance.

Authors

Sachin Rajan is a senior  member of Russell  Reynolds Associates' Healthcare and Private Capital  sectors.  He is based in Mumbai.

Vinita Katara is a senior  member of Russell  Reynolds Associates' Corporate Officers and Private Capital sectors.  She is based in Mumbai.

Rahul Thapar is a member  of the Russell  Reynolds Associates' Financial Officers, Private Capital and Technology sectors.  He is based in Mumbai.

Kayanush  Patel is a member of the Russell  Reynolds Associates'  Research team for the Financial Officers practice.  She is based in Mumbai

List of Attendees

Kaleeswaran Arunachalam - Global Chief Financial  Officer,  Eicher Motors
CV Ram - Chief Financial  Officer,  Pharmeasy
Girdhar  Chitlangia - Entrepreneur in Residence, Samara Capital
Geiv Dubash - Chief Financial  Officer, Zoomcar
Dalpat Raj Jain - Group Chief Financial Officer, Greaves Cotton  Limited
Rajiv Pillai - Chief Financial Officer,  Lighthouse Learning  Private Limited
Narayan  Barasia  - Chief Financial Officer, SBFC Finance P.  Limited

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices