For Future Sustainable Board Members, Vision is Key | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

For Future Sustainable Board Members, Vision is Key

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

August 23, 2022

4 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

Vision-oriented boards outperformed reaction-oriented boards and felt more confident about their leadership team’s ability to tackle sustainability issues.

Close

Boards that take a vision-oriented approach to sustainability reap greater returns for overall company success. As next generation board leaders consider the sustainability strategy they want to adopt, understanding the strengths and weaknesses of these two approaches is key. Using data from our 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Survey, Russell Reynolds Associates (RRA) recently examined two divergent approaches to sustainability among boards. 310 board directors were asked to select which option best represented their board’s the primary function as it relates to the company’s environmental, sustainability, and governance.

*3% of board directors answered “not applicable” to the sustainability oversight question

Board leaders are more focused on sustainability as a future impact to business than their executive counterparts, with 26% ranking climate change and environmental damage as one of the top five threats to impact their business over the next 12-18 months, compared to 16% of global executives and next-generation leaders.1

However, next-generation leaders feel less confident in their supervisory/non-executive board than board directors themselves feel, with only 65% of next-generational leaders reporting that they feel their board effectively embraces the opportunities of sustainability, compared to 80% of board members. This highlights the need to build a strong board leadership pipeline that encompasses sustainability strategy, identifying future board leaders who both understand the business imperative for sustainability and can meaningfully articulate their sustainability-oriented actions to the rest of the organization.

“When it comes to demonstrating clear fluency or operational experience in sustainability matters, our observation is that there is a generational shift happening in boardrooms, and more of the newer directors, including first-time directors, have had more hands-on experience in their operational executive roles on sustainability-related matters, as those matters have risen up the corporate agenda.”2

Michelle Edkins
Managing Director, BlackRock Investment Stewardship

Reaction-Oriented Boards vs Vision-Oriented Boards

Reaction-oriented boards tend to bend to changing short-term demands, rather than creating a long-term vision that they engage with prior to reacting. This constant strategy redirection can make these boards more agile, but also ensures that it will take longer to reach the organization’s sustainability goals. Conversely, vision-oriented boards are more hands-off with goal execution—they are involved in strategy planning, but not the implementation.

Different board strategies for sustainability may make sense at various stages of organizational maturity, sustainability strategy and initiatives, or depending on other organizational priorities, such as diversity, equity, and inclusion, or planned growth. Reaction-oriented boards tend to be larger companies than vision-oriented boards, with 12% of reaction-oriented boards coming from companies of $100 billion USD revenue or greater, and only 1% of vision-oriented boards from the same group.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor Survey 2022. N = 30 reaction-oriented board members, 222 vision-oriented board members.

*The bars refer to revenue of responding company

Strategize, Then Act: Measure Twice, Cut Once

Vision-oriented boards feel their leadership teams are more prepared to face climate change and environmental damage, uncertain economic growth, and the availability of key talent/skills. Vision-oriented boards are over 4x more likely to feel that their leadership team is prepared to handle uncertain economic growth. Additionally, vision-oriented boards also tend to be more confident that their board and leadership team effectively embrace sustainability opportunities.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor Survey 2022. N = 30 reaction-oriented board members, 222 vision-oriented board members.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor Survey 2022. N = 30 reaction-oriented board members, 222 vision-oriented board members.

Vision-oriented boards’ confidence is warranted—over half of board directors in this category reported that their company has outperformed against industry average shareholder returns over the past two years, while only 10% of reaction-oriented boards could report the same.

Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor Survey 2022. N = 30 reaction-oriented board members, 222 vision-oriented board members.

With a fast-paced global economy and the pressing concerns of environment and social movements, it can be difficult to have the discipline and fortitude to focus on a long-term sustainability plan before springing into action. However, a clear and defined goal provides a north-star to innovate against, which will benefit overall company success.

To ensure that boards are well-equipped to deal with evolving organizational strategies, boards must keep sustainability at the forefront of their involvement with investors, internal and external stakeholders, and the CEO. When deciding how to structure board involvement in sustainability issues, it is important to remember that change comes from within. Next-generation board directors need to be poised to develop a strategic sustainability vision and, most importantly, have the conviction to adhere to it.

Read more about preparing next-generation sustainable board directors here:

Next-Generation Sustainable Board Directors | Russell Reynolds Associates

1 Source: RRA Global Leadership Monitor Survey 2022. N = 565 Next-generation leaders

2 Chrissa Pagitsas, 2022. "Chief Sustainability Officers At Work," Springer Books, Springer, number 978-1-4842-7866-6, June.

Authors

Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.

Emily Meneer is leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Practice Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices