Are your C-suite Operations & Supply Chain Leaders a Flight Risk? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Are Your C-suite Operations & Supply Chain Leaders a Flight Risk?

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceLeadershipSuccessionOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

+ 1 author

March 22, 2023

7 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceLeadershipSuccessionOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

As more C-suite operations & supply chain executives consider a career change, organizations should invest in retention efforts specific to these leaders.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

If you think your operations & supply chain leaders are content in their roles, think again. Nearly half are willing to make a career move today.

C-suite operations & supply chain leaders refers to C-suite operations, procurement and supply chain executives.

According to Russell Reynolds Associates’ Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, 44% of C-suite operations & supply chain leaders reported willingness to make a career change (Figure 1). This figure is up from our Q2 2022 Monitor. Given that insight, we are likely to see increased movement of C-suite operations & supply chain leaders in 2023. In addition to movement within their own industries, over one-third of these leaders are open to opportunities beyond their current sectors, indicating increased competition for talent and more challenging retention environments.

While a comparatively high percentage of these leaders are open to leaving their current organizations, they are also concerned about losing high quality talent on their own teams and supportive of investments to retain critical talent.

Our data shows that—compared to the rest of the C-suite—operations & supply chain leaders hold unique motivations and require a bespoke retention approach. In this piece, we outline these motivations and recommend specific actions to help retain these leaders.

Figure 1: Percentage of operations & supply chains leaders that are a flight risk

Source:  RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Q4 2022, base n = 71 C-level Operations, Procurement and Supply Chain executives

For many C-suite operations & supply chain leaders, the grass is greener at other companies

Operations & supply chain leaders have led through significant disruption over the past few years. Generally, these leaders have been loyal to their organizations, but with continued economic and geopolitical uncertainty, more have begun to explore new career options.

Half of the C-suite operations & supply chain leaders open to a career move cited “greater faith in stability or long-term success of a different company” as the top factor, followed by “career advancement” and “seeking new responsibilities” (Figure 2). Interestingly, this top factor was ranked sixth in our Q2 Monitor—meaning that the percentage of operations & supply chain leaders who have lost faith in their organization has increased by over 20%. This highlights how quickly buy-in on organizational vision and strategy can evolve—or plummet.

Similarly, two out the top three reasons are related to career growth, likely indicating that many of these leaders are hungry for development opportunities that they feel are not available within their current organizations.

Operations & supply chain leaders have different motivations than the rest of the C-suite

While most of the top six reasons for a career move are the same, the order of importance varies between operations & supply chain and other C-suite leaders. Only 24% of the other flight risk C-suite executives cite “greater faith in stability or long-term success of a different company” as a top factor, compared to 50% of operations & supply chain leaders.

Also notable: “better pay” ranks surprisingly low with operations & supply chain leaders. While this is the number one reason the broader C-suite would consider a career move, it only ranks fifth for these leaders.

It appears that the stressors of the last three years have manifested differently for C-suite operations & supply chain executives, perhaps causing them to consider opportunities that provide more stability and career advancement. This may also be a consequence of being squarely and uniquely responsible for managing supply chains through crisis and disruption that have affected global companies.

Figure 2: Top reasons for making a career move – operations & supply chain leaders vs. C-suite

Source:  RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Q4 2022, base n = 49 C-level Operations, Procurement and Supply Chain executives, base n = 553 C-suite executives

Concern about operations & supply chain talent applies across multiple levels

While a significant proportion of C-suite operations & supply chain leaders are flight risks themselves, they are simultaneously aware of the talent risks facing their current organization. In our Q4 2022 Monitor, operations & supply chain leaders ranked “availability of key talent” second behind “uncertain economic growth” as the top factors impacting their organization over the next 12 to 18 months. Furthermore, C-suite operations & supply chain leaders ranked “investments into retaining critical talent” as the most important response to recession, while "engage is workforce reductions" was the least chosen response (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Operations & supply chain leaders would invest in talent as response to a recession

Source: RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Q4 2022, base n = 56 C-level Operations, Procurement and Supply Chain executives

Operations & supply chain talent shortages have persisted for years. The Covid-19 pandemic, quickly changing skillset requirements, and continued generational retirement factors have worsened the market outlook. A recent study conducted by EY found that 44% of nearly 100 chief procurement officers surveyed have challenges finding the right talent, and that procurement departments have seen a higher-than-normal level of attrition and movement resulting in increased competition for talent globally.1 According to Jim Rice, Deputy Director of MIT Center for Transportation & Logistics, labor shortages are clearly the biggest supply chain challenge today.2

Turning reasons for leaving into retention motivations

The reasons behind C-suite operations & supply chain leaders’ willingness to leave their organization can be reframed in active retention efforts and longer-term initiatives to reduce attrition. Given that nearly half of operations & supply chain leaders are open to changing employers, the situation calls for a proactive response.

Better pay almost always makes a difference, but there are more important factors to focus on to improve these leaders’ retention. To mitigate the risk of losing key operations & supply chain leaders, organizations should focus on reigniting purpose, fostering a growth mindset, investing in team development and retention below the C-suite, and offering bespoke executive development that can help broaden capabilities. Thoughtful and proactive succession planning can support these development efforts. These recommendations are specific to operations & supply chain in the C-suite and align with what most motivates these leaders.

Purpose

Knowing their purpose keeps leaders engaged, connected, and confident. A clear and aligned purpose provides direction and serves as a powerful resource for leaders in times of change and ambiguity; it fosters customer engagement, loyalty, and drives financial performance. Leaders must align their personal purpose with that of their team and organization.

Growth mindset

Leaders with a growth mindset believe that capabilities aren’t set in stone and can be developed. They seek out challenging tasks and take calculated risks, viewing setbacks, mistakes, and feedback as learning opportunities. They also value hard work and continuous improvement and are motivated by the achievements of their peers and teams.

Executive development

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we support individual development planning and programs through our 3E Development Framework— Expertise, Experience and Exposure— coaching and career pathing. Coaching targets key development areas, increases self-awareness, mitigates derailing behaviors, and exponentially impacts leadership effectiveness. Career pathing identifies roles that are linked closely to leaders’ development gaps, exposing leaders to new opportunities that support their growth.

C-suite operations & supply chain leaders are well-positioned to navigate through continued challenges while delivering on customer expectations. With prolonged challenges and disruptions across organizations and the global economy, mitigating the risk of losing these leaders is critical. By investing in intentional and thoughtful retention approaches, organizations can design effective short and long-term retention efforts. With elevated flight risk across multiple levels within operations & supply chain management, leadership retention can also build confidence and stability across teams.

Authors

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Dallas.

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in the Americas. He is based in Toronto.

Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.

Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.

Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.

References

1. 2022 Global EY Chief Procurement Officer Survey.

2. Eric Brown, November 21, 2022. MIT News. Building resilience for the next supply chain disruption.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices