Nordic Board Study 2022 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Nordic Board Study 2022

Inclusive LeadershipNext Generation BoardsIndustry TrendsInclusionCulture RiskBoard and CEO Advisory

Article

Tommi Lankila

August 24, 2022

8 min

Inclusive LeadershipNext Generation BoardsIndustry TrendsInclusionCulture RiskBoard and CEO Advisory

Executive Summary

A detailed look at board composition and governance in companies of the four leading Nordic stock indices in 2022.

Close

Tommi Lankila

Helsinki

As Europe tries to recover from COVID-19 and adjust to war in Ukraine, these shifts seem to have had negligible effects on Nordic boards. This year’s Nordic Board Study examines current quantitative board demographics, including diversity, tenure, age, renewal, meeting frequency, and compensation. As in previous years, Russell Reynolds Associates collected data across four main Indexes in Denmark (Copenhagen OMXC20), Finland (Helsinki OMXH25), Norway (Oslo OBX25), and Sweden (Stockholm OMXS30). The dataset was collected from February to June 2022.1

Gender diversity progress is visible, but women still occupy less than 40% of Nordic boards seats

Since 2016, the share of women on Nordic boards has risen from an average of 34.2% to an average of 39.2% in 2022, with incremental annual improvements. While the women representation in Oslo is currently down, this is a result of the stock reshuffling that took place in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, Norway leads the region with six companies (Telenor, Aker ASA, Kahoot!, Orkla, Rec Silicon, Yara International) that have over 50% share of women on their boards. Finland, on the contrary, has only one company (Nordea) whose board has reached gender parity.

Despite the steady rise in women board members over the years, women representation on boards still lags behind men’s. Denmark and Finland saw highest increase in women representation on this front—in Denmark, women committee chairs rose from 20% in 2021 to 27% in 2022, while deputy chairs decreased from 20% to 17%. In Finland, women committee chairs rose from 31% in 2021 to 35% in 2022 and deputy chairs rose from 22% to 36%. Oslo saw the steepest drop in deputy chairs from 33% (2021) to 11% (2022).

However, Norway has the highest number of women board chairs (16%), while Finland claims only 4%. Denmark and Sweden both report 8%. Since there are few board positions, even one women member makes an impact in the percentages. That said, the void-of-women in certain positions of power cannot be denied.

Women Representation on Nordic Boards (2020-2022)

Source: RRA Nordic Board Benchmarking, 2022; n = 99 Nordic OMX/OBX indexed companies

Age and Tenure

The average age of Nordic board members has not altered much since last year’s study. Boards are mainly dominated by men between ages 59 to 61. Both Denmark and Sweden have the oldest and longest serving board members—in Denmark, 45% of the board members are older than 60. In Sweden, 52% of board members are ages 60 or older. Finland and Norway have the youngest boards in this respect. If we investigate tenures, women across all Nordic boards serve almost a year and a half less than their male colleagues. Compared to other Nordic countries, Finland tends to rotate their board members almost a year earlier than the other countries.

Source: RRA Nordic Board Benchmarking, 2022; n = 99 Nordic OMX/OBX indexed companies

Nationality

Since 2020, we have noted a slight increase in Nordic board internationalization. It is still rare to see representation from other regions, such as Asia-Pacific, Middle East, Africa, or Americas. Then again, this internationalization is highly dependent on business needs; for example, local-market businesses tend to rely more on local talent, such as financial services (Nordic: Non-Nordic ratio is 86:14) and consumer/food (80:20). If we compare to global logistics (58:32) or oil/gas (61:39), we notice that the need for international board members is much higher. Other Nordic global businesses, such as pulp & paper (71:29) and industrial goods (73:27), stand in the middle ground.

Source: RRA Nordic Board Benchmarking, 2022; n = 99 Nordic OMX/OBX indexed companies

Board member background

Regarding individual board member background highlights, Sweden has the highest number of board members who serve on two locally or in other Nordic major indices. 16.9% of Swedish board members hold two seats compared to Finland’s 13.5%, Denmark’s 13%, and Norway’s 11.2%. In the big picture, only 1.9% of all Nordic board members hold three or more positions in the main Nordic indices. These numbers only reflect major Nordic index boards and do not consider any other possible board memberships.

As for current board member’s background, we find certain national traits to highlight. For example, Finland favors current sitting CEOs in their boards. However, sitting CEO percentage dipped from 16% (2021) to 13% (2022). Denmark has the highest amount (5%) of board members coming from currently serving CFO-positions. Norway favors non-executive board members (e.g., specialists or other full-time occupations), as 24% of board members hold other full-time occupations, compared to 9% to 15% of board members from other Nordic regions. Sweden has the highest amount of people who have gone plural, as 71% of their boards consist of pure board professionals. This goes hand in hand with the fact that Swedish boards are, on average, the most senior.

Source: RRA Nordic Board Benchmarking, 2022; n = 99 Nordic OMX/OBX indexed companies

Slight decreases in board meetings and increases in compensation

On average, Nordic boards meet roughly once per month. Finland leads with the highest amounts of board meetings compared to any other Nordic country. In 2021, 54% of Finnish boards met more than 12 times a year and 4% met a staggering 19 times. While these numbers are high, they were even higher in 2020, with 75% of Finnish boards meeting more than 12 times and a quarter meeting more than 19 times.

Boards in other Nordic countries met significantly less often. In Norway, 41% of boards met more than 12 times per year (versus 35% in 2020); in Sweden, 38% met more than 12 times per year (50% in 2020); and in Denmark, only 29% met monthly (35% in 2020). After the first wave of the pandemic, the Finnish boards have decreased their average annual meetings from 16 to 13, while the other Nordic countries were barely affected in terms of meeting schedules. Even so, if we compare to the German DAX 40—of which, over three quarters of companies met less than nine times per year—the Nordic boards require a great deal of participation.

Source: RRA Nordic Board Benchmarking, 2022; n = 99 Nordic OMX/OBX indexed companies

As we pointed out last year, busy meeting schedules across Nordic boards also drops the average compensation per meeting. In 2022, the German DAX 40 boards compensated their members on average 15,800 Euros per meeting (compared to 15,100 in 2021). In Sweden, the average pay per meeting was 8,800€ (up from 7,200€ in 2021); in Denmark, it was 6,300€ (up from 6,000€); in Finland, 6,000€ (4,700€); and in Norway, it was 4,500€ (3,700€). Notably, all Nordic countries saw an increase in their board fees per meeting. Finland’s 28% rise is significant even on a European level while Sweden and Norway follow with their 22% rise against last year. Denmark saw a minimal increase of 5%. Compared to last year, per-meeting-increases in other indices were Swiss SMI 15%, Swiss SMIM 23%, and DAX 40 5%. Hence, Nordic boards—with exception of Denmark— followed the same trend as in Switzerland.

Source: RRA Nordic Board Benchmarking, 2022; n = 99 Nordic OMX/OBX indexed companies

Conclusion

This year’s Nordic Board Study found that:

Women representation in the Nordic main indices has progressed and follows the trend from previous years. However, women are still underrepresented on Nordic boards.

Nordic boards have become a bit more international, with their composition mainly drawing from other Nordic or European nationalities. Here, the business sector dictates the need for international vs. local expertise.

Board fees per meeting rose in the Nordic boards, though the average meeting schedule was barely affected. Only Finland saw a major decrease in board meetings.

Appendix: Changes in the OMX/OBX company mix since 2021 study

Current board changes in the indices were: 1) in Denmark, Jyske Bank returns to the list and Simcorp fell off. 2) In Finland, last year’s rising company, the Metso spin-off Neles went off the list together with Kemira and Metsä Board. Qt and Harvia rose with SSAB. 3) In Norway, we see drastic changes with rise of Golden Ocean, Nordic Semiconductor, Adevinta, Kahoot!, MPC Container Ships, Recsilicon, while BW LPG, BW Offshore, DNO, Entra, Leroy, and TGS dropped off. 4) In Sweden, Securitas gave space for Sinch.

Click here to read our Nordic Board Study 2021.

Authors

Dr. Tommi Lankila is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates Board and CEO practice. He is based in Helsinki.

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Speak to a consultant

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Online Grocery Spiked During COVID-19. What Now?

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices