Why Your Next HealthTech CTO Might be New to Healthcare | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why Your Next HealthTech CTO Might be New to Healthcare

Transformation and InnovationHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Article

November 03, 2022

3 min

Transformation and InnovationHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Executive summary

HealthTech hiring going sector agnostic: recent trends point to CTOs joining from tech-first organizations, often consumer tech or fintech.

Close

Healthcare technology continues to be one of the fastest growing sectors fueled by unprecedented capital inflow. In 2021, digital health companies raised $57.2B USD across 2,930 deals, a 79% increase from the previous year1. In 2022, despite some consolidation and slow down, investments are still strong, paralleling the current market climate. Given this growth, it’s no surprise that there has been tremendous talent activity in the space. Historically, healthtech organizations have hired technology talent from within the healthcare sector. However, in many other growth sectors, we see  talent join from other industries..

So, what’s happening in healthtech? Is the sector still prioritizing domain experience over customer-centered design,  technology, and leadership skills that healthtech leaders are required to have?

Our analysis suggests that it is not, and in fact, sometimes healthtech companies are better off looking outside…

At both newly crowned unicorns and public healthtech companies with a market cap of $350M USD or more, top technology leadership often comes from other sectors. 53% of chief technology officers at leading healthtech organizations were at a technology-first organization immediately prior to appointment. Furthermore, a whopping 87% of the same chief technology officers worked at a technology organization at some point in their career. A similar analysis completed a few years ago would have yielded different results - the majority of these leaders have been appointed since 2020.

But why have healthtech organizations begun to hire their tech talent from outside the sector?

Through recent conversations with several healthcare technology C-suite leaders, RRA identified the top three reasons for considering top technology leadership from outside the industry.

1. Increased customer centricity

Customer-centricity tends to be a core tenet of tech-first organizations. We analyzed CTO alumni of Uber, Stripe, and Amazon – all companies whose successes are often measured against a positive user experience. The objective of many healthtech organizations is to alleviate the woes that many patients and providers face within our current healthcare system and existing solutions. Technology leadership with world-class, customer-first experience can help healthtech organizations achieve such objectives.

2. A new perspective on relevant regulatory expertise

CTOs that join healthcare organizations from other highly regulated industries like financial services or fintech bring a deep expertise and different perspective on regulatory and security matters. These executives pair customer-centricity with an added understanding of the importance of data privacy. Executives from regulated industries already know how to design products with user data security in mind.

3. Comfort with complex technical systems

Healthtech companies may hire a CTO from another sector to find talent familiar with highly complex systems that must integrate with legacy technology. For example, a leader from a high-growth SaaS organization likely possesses great technical knowledge around interoperability and large volumes of data that is extremely relevant for the healthtech industry. Highly technical skills are critical for organizations dealing with large volumes of data and systems that require innovations and integrations.

The new healthcare technology leader profile

To better understand the profiles of these CTOs, RRA also examined their functional backgrounds. 81% of these leaders have a functional background in software engineering, and often started their careers at a large technology firm as a software engineer. 40% of leaders have product management experience as well, and often progressed from software engineers into product managers over the course of their careers.

The healthtech CTO of tomorrow

Healthtech organizations can differentiate themselves by sourcing talent that brings perspective from an industry with innovative tenets that healthcare aspires to, such as consumer technology or fintech. Because a chief technology officer is so critical to the success of a healthcare technology organization, it is imperative that individuals responsible for filling that role know where to source the best talent. Healthcare sector experience is no longer the most important factor in determining if a candidate is a good fit; instead, the CTO of healthtech’s tomorrow should bring customer-centricity, exposure to a regulated industry, and complex technical experience.

Authors

Noël Auguston leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ global Healthcare Technology practice. She is based in Boston.

Hope Cummins is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ knowledge management team, focusing on Healthcare Technology. She is based in San Francisco.

References

1 CBInsights. State of Digital Health 2021 Report. https://www.cbinsights.com/research/report/digital-health-trends-2021/

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices