Nose In, Fingers Out, and Ears to the Ground: The Rising Mindset of Boards Overseeing Culture and Talents | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Nose In, Fingers Out, and Ears to the Ground: The Rising Mindset of Boards Overseeing Culture and Talents

Next Generation BoardsFamily BusinessBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Effectiveness

Article

Grace Cheng

January 18, 2023

8 min

Next Generation BoardsFamily BusinessBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Effectiveness

Executive summary

With the increasing ambiguity organizations face today, boards should be involved in talent management strategy and oversight.

Close

Grace Cheng

Beijing

Traditionally, directors have focused their talent management efforts on the C-suite, leaving oversight of the broader workforce to the management team. But in the post-pandemic economy, investor pressure to advance inclusion efforts, as well as the pace of business and digital change have made it critical for boards to provide greater oversight of talent management at multiple levels of the organization.

The success of major organizational transformations, including M&A, digital transformation, and strategic realignment often depend heavily on managing the “people” side of the strategic organizational development.

With the ever-increasing uncertainty and ambiguity that organizations face today, do boards need to adjust human capital approach and oversight? If yes, how should boards adjust?

In this paper, we will explore some common themes of what and why this change is happening, what this means for board composition, and how it affects board and senior leadership role definitions. We will also discuss how boards can play the role of facilitator or inhibitor for successful transformations, thus setting the right organizational tone.

What are the organizational risks if boards only focus on traditional C-suite matters, leaving oversight of the broader workforce purely to management team?

In the past—and, to a large extent, still today—many boards give talent oversight completely to management team. At a recent Russell Reynolds Associates (RRA) Board Leadership Conference convening of over 800 stakeholders around the topic of board leadership in Asia, it became increasingly clear that theory had been overtaken by real practical practice in this topic for the first time. Boards are shaping the talent agenda and executive team, while a few years ago, it was the other way around.

“Deloitte Governance Framework”   research discusses five elements of board oversight: performance, strategy, governance, talent, and integrity. Here, talent is not just one of the five elements; it is the central point of all these elements. Without the right talent, high performance will not be achieved and strategy can’t be carried out.

Management teams know how important it is for organizations to attract and retain talent. However, if boards do not understand human capital matters, it will be challenging to attract top talent, making it difficult to lead the transformation changes that many organizations are going through. When we look into cases of organizational failure, it is often due to human factors—lack of competency, lack of oversight, and a culture that has gone wrong—for which boards are ultimately accountable. Sadly, for many organizations, corporate culture only comes into play after there is a crisis and subsequent investigation that reveals cultural failings.

Due to the increasing focus on organizational culture, equity, inclusion, social responsibility, and employee empowerment, we have seen more boards shift their talent oversight. The boards who have made the shift have an edge in attracting and maintaining an empowered workforce, while those who have not will lose out in long run.

Considering this, boards should proactively assess the health of their corporate cultures before a crisis hits, investing the proper time and resources in human capital development throughout the organization whole year round. Additionally, boards should confirm that its organization has an effective and robust talent management program capable of delivering value for shareholders. Executing active oversight regarding the strategic elements cannot be delegated to management alone.

So what do boards need to do when overseeing talent management?

Boards should be responsible for approval and decision making on key talent matters, focusing on a big picture approach.

1. Provide C-suite oversight: Going beyond the traditional C-suite compensation, immediate succession and business performance discussions, boards should incorporate talent needs into strategic discussions, making this part of management team’s OKR and holding the CEO & C-Suite accountable for company’s  performance on talent management, tracking long term initiatives.

2. Build the succession pipeline: Boards can utilize their succession planning committees and nomination committees to ensure that they always have a strong C-suite pipeline, helping them execute the corporate strategy without gaps or lags. Talent should be viewed on at least a 10-year horizon. This will prepare the organization for future impacts as well as today’s talent needs, making succession a governance issue as much as a performance one.

3. Set strategic talent management: Set direction and objectives around talent management, including upskilling, ESG & inclusion policy, upholding healthy organizational values and culture, and helping the organization attract, develop, and retain talent. Today, merely outbidding competitors with attractive salaries will not be enough to attract high performers. Instead, organizations need to provide a holistic work experience, including growth opportunities, a sense of community, and work/life balance. Boards can help management teams set the right organizational culture by modeling these behaviors.

4. Embed inclusion into the organization:   Board should create clear criteria and ensure any unnecessary barriers to succession are removed, maximizing diverse perspectives to ensure a broad pool and balanced assessment tools that remove human bias and provide fair evaluation. According to Russell Reynolds Associates 2022 C-Suite Performance Research, 77% of nomination committee chairs say that inclusion expertise is important for senior executives; however, according to PWC Annual Director’s Survey 2021, less than one-fifth of board directors give their own companies a great score for organizational efforts in recruiting a diverse workforce. We believe this mismatching is due to a misalignment between the board and management team.

For example, a northern European company has successfully driven inclusion initiatives by establishing four strategic pillars for the organization: sustainability, learning & development, inclusion, and digitalization. The chairman regularly meets the global top 100 executives, reenforcing this strategic focus. On inclusion front, vacant positions are published globally to ensure equitable access to new opportunities. These board-dictated policies ensure a broader pool of candidates.

5. Foster a strong board & corporate culture: To strengthen corporate culture, boards need to help organizations create an environment that encourages training and development and the psychological safety to flag problems when they first arise. Boards should also improve its oversight of talent-related risk, like organizational reputation risk, business regulatory risk, and management team style. For example, in private equity companies today, an increasing number of boards have advised the management team to do people-related due diligence, in addition to financial and reputation due diligence, before making an offer to avoid any surprises down the line.

6. Ask for regular updates: Boards can elevate the chief human resources officer (CHRO) to a more strategic role and ask for regular updates on the status of their organization’s talent management, including talent retention strategies, training & development programs, workforce demographics, incentives, and compensation so to better understand the organizational culture.  Boards need data and accountability to ensure that their talent management efforts align with their corporate strategy. Either the full board should take responsibility for it, or they can delegate it to a committee so that it will be addressed and monitored throughout the year. Some boards even ask their CHRO to report to both the CEO and the board.

The holding board for one of our clients, a 200-year-old conglomerate, signs off on policies around whistleblowing and inclusion, endorsing talent capital strategy and formulation. The board’s remuneration and nomination committees meet with the C-suite three times a year. The first meeting of the year is a week-long offsite focusing on C suite talent review, where board & executive team jointly develop talent strategy; the other two subsequent meetings are shorter reviews of said talent strategy’s implementation.

7. Ensure that the board has talent management skills within its ranks:  Over the last two years, we have observed many boards recognizing the need for digital, technology, and key culture capabilities in their ranks. However, a talent management capability within the board’s ranks is just as important. While adding talent management to board capability matrices is on the rise, it’s not increasing fast enough.

One of our clients, a global top sportswear company, realized that they were struggling to understand current young consumers. They decided to add a young technology leader to the board, in order to understand this demographic, as well as to understand the disruptive use of technology. Boards should think hard about what is missing from their skillsets and work fill the gap. While in the past, boards focused more on attracting legal and audit backgrounds expertise, we see more boards adding CHROs or people who understand systematic talent management to their ranks.

What brings energy to a company are its employees, leaders, and its culture. Therefore, the ability to attract, develop and retain top talent has become a critical business differentiator. A greater focus on “people” issues—which includes business excellence, quality, talent management, health & safety, inclusion—means that board members need new skills, experiences, and team dynamics for effective decision-making and oversight.  As boards and management teams partner on talent management, boards should keep their “nose in, fingers out and ears to the ground”, described by our panels at the Russell Reynolds APAC Board Leadership Conference on the Board’s Role in Talent subject. It means - board should understands what is going on, set strategic direction, review and listen to what is happening in the organization, while leaving the implementation to the management team.

Authors

Grace Cheng is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO practice. She is based in Beijing.
Lucy Lei

Russell Reynolds Associates 2022 APAC Board Leadership Conference. (2022, October 19 & 20), https://www.russellreynolds.com/en/insights/events/apac-board-leadership-forum-2022

Russell Reynolds Associates 2022 C-Suite Performance Research & related research

Russell Reynolds Associates, A Framework for Governance Leadership

Deloitte & PWC research on boards oversight on talents

Russell Reynolds Associates interviewed retail, industrial and consumer companies for this article

Russell Reynolds Associates. (2022, December 12). Why Bad Things Happen to Good Companies: A Risk Culture Study, https://www.russellreynolds.com/en/insights/articles/why-bad-things-happen-to-good-companies

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices