CFO Turnover in 2022 Slows, But Don’t Expect it to Stay | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CFO Turnover in 2022 Slows, But Don’t Expect it to Stay

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerEducationFinancial ServicesGovernmentHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyProfessional ServicesExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionInclusion and CultureDevelopment and Transition

Article

October 25, 2022

5 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsLeadershipSuccessionConsumerEducationFinancial ServicesGovernmentHealthcareIndustrialTechnologyProfessional ServicesExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionInclusion and CultureDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

CFO turnover dips with a quarter left in 2022, however, multiple trends are suggesting that turnover will be on the rise in the last quarter of the year.

Close

Linda Barham

Chicago

Jim Lawson

New York

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

CFO Turnover in 2022 Slows, But Don’t Expect it to Stay

As of Q3 in 2022, there have been 71 CFO transitions within the S&P 500, bringing turnover to 14% year to date. This number is slightly down from 16% at this time last year (Figure 1), likely due to CFOs favoring the job security of their current role as the market slows.

However, this slowing turnover may paint a misleading picture. Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed CFOs from the S&P 500 from 2019 to 2022 (N = 500) to compare turnover rates at the end of Quarter 3 (Q1-Q3) and gain insight into the latest hiring trends such as gender diversity, internal versus external promotions, first-time in the role and CFO exits. We found that, while turnover was indeed down in the first three quarters of 2022, multiple trends are suggesting that turnover will continue to rise in the last quarter of the year.

Due to the expected increase in market volatility, CFOs should expect more scrutiny of their job performances from the CEO and Board, therefore increasing the potential for increased turnover.

Better succession planning is leading to more internal and first-time CFO appointments, resulting in the fight for women CFO talent to carry on, with the percentage of newly appointed women CFOs continuing to outpace the broader S&P 500, although slightly down since last year.

Finally, CFO retirement rates increased for the first time in three years, indicating that more turnover is likely on the horizon.

Figure 1. Trending CFO Turnover

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of September 2022, N= 500
Note: 7 of the new CFOs are interim

Better succession planning is creating more ready-now women CFOs

Succession planning continues to pay off for S&P 500 companies, with 63% of newly appointed CFOs being promoted internally. Coming off a tight CFO talent market in 2021 with a record number of IPOs, even those looking externally for CFO talent are having to get creative. 38% of external hires are first-time in the role, bringing the total percent of newly appointed CFOs first-time in role to 77%, both record highs for the past several years (Figure 2.)

Figure 2. Trending Interval versus External Appointments

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of September 2022, n= 264
Note: 7 of the new CFOs are interim

Succession planning has been successful in improving CFO gender diversity, as a result, this talent is starting to be open to external roles, as public companies become more open to first-time CFOs (Figure 3.) This will likely lead to increased turnover, especially given the demand for women CFOs. As the fight for talent rages on, companies need to ensure they are engaging with women CFOs and CFO succession candidates, or risk losing them.

Figure 3. Trending Internal versus External Women CFO Appointments

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of September 2022, n= 57
Note: 1 of the new women CFOs are interim

Increased rates of retirement for the first time in years

For the first time in three years, CFO retirement rates have increased (Figure 4.) With 52% of CFOs departing their roles to retire since January 2022, whether increased retirement rates continue through the end of the year raises the question: Will public company CFOs post-pone retirement and wait for their equity to bounce back, or will CFOs who already postponed retirement for the pandemic be keen to retire with stronger headwinds ahead?

Figure 4. Trending CFO Departures

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of September 2022, n=71

Of the CFOs who left their roles and did not retire, the majority took non-CFO roles (Figure 5) with 74% of those doing so at their current organization (Figure 6). As we suggested in our previous  ,2 one way to retain and engage CFO talent is by broadening their responsibilities. By broadening CFOs' roles, many CFOs are inspired to take a non-CFO position in their next move, while remaining loyal to their current company.

Figure 5. Number of Departing CFOs Per New Role

Source: RRA analysis of S&P 500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of September 2022, n= 71

Figure 6. 2022 CFO Exists

Source: RRA analysis of S&P 500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of September 2022, n= 71

While current market conditions may dampen CFOs' willingness to move companies, the fight for women CFOs, an aging population, and how companies fare during economic uncertainty all suggest that there is still turnover yet to come. To address this risk, we recommend continuing to engage with CFO and succession candidates through career development, enhanced scope of the role, and retention efforts. For those not lucky enough to have the bench strength to backfill potential transitions, next-generation is here and first-time CFOs are ready for the challenge.

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Americas Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Chicago.

Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. He is based in New York.

Catherine Schroeder is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Financial Officers Practice Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

References

1. RRA analysis of the S&P 500 CFOs from 2019 to the end of September 2022
2. RRA ‘2021: The year of CFO turnover and strides in gender diversity’, 2021

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices