How Boards Can Assess the Potential and Readiness of Future CEOs | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Boards Can Assess the Potential and Readiness of Future CEOs

CEO Succession

Article

August 12, 2022

5 min

CEO Succession

Executive Summary

CEO succession planning should be a continuous process that ensures you’re developing a group of high-potential leaders.

Close

Justus O’Brien

Stamford

Erin Zolna, Ph.D.

New York

Aimee Williamson

Sydney

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

CEO succession planning works best when it’s a continuous process that constantly replenishes your pipeline of future leaders. And that means you need to start it early. In fact, the board should start planning for the next CEO from the first day a new one steps into the job.

From day one, you need to define what you want in your next CEO, find who in your organization has the potential to get there, and outline how you’ll develop those skills in the coming years. And, when it comes time to choose a successor, you’ll need to accurately assess your candidates to choose the right leader.

The question is, how do you start so early?

How do you define the skills your CEO will need years in advance? How do you find high-potential candidates? And how do you nurture them to ensure they’re ready to step up when the time comes?

Define what you need in a CEO

Great CEO succession starts with a success profile—a documented view of what your organization needs in its next CEO. While it’s difficult to predict the critical requirements for your next CEO five or six years in advance, a success profile will help you think about future needs systematically and align the board early in the process.

The board is solely responsible for appointing the CEO, so members need to discuss the success profile in detail. Unless the board defines and aligns to a robust success profile, you’ll be flying blind as you develop and choose your next CEO.

This starts with the organizational strategy. What are your organization’s long-term ambitions? What’s the trajectory of the wider market and society? And how will changes force your strategy to evolve in the next few years?

With the board aligned around this long-term strategic view, you can debate the actions your next CEO will need to take to deliver on the strategy. Clearly defining these expected deliverables will let you think about the critical experiences the candidates will need to have if they’re to be successful. Only then will you be able to define the skills—functional, leadership, and personal—your next CEO will need.

Together, the strategy, actions, experiences, and skills form your success profile. But it shouldn’t be a static document—imagining the future is imprecise, and development and assessment evolve continuously, so it’s critical to revisit and refresh your success profile regularly.

Assess the potential of internal candidates

Once you’ve defined what you want from your next CEO, you should assess your current leaders to understand who has the potential to meet those needs, and what they’ll need to develop.

When assessing against your success profile, you should include interviews with multiple experts, psychometric tests, and 360-degree feedback to measure six criteria:

Intellect, problem-solving, and systems thinking

Ability to work well with ambiguity and conflict

Ability to learn continuously

Drive to excel at an extremely high level

Emotional intelligence and ability to influence others

Leadership style versatility

The goal is to produce a list of potential internal candidates to work with, and tailored development plans for each to steer them in the right direction.

To be most effective, it’s best to run this assessment early. By doing it four or five years before changing CEOs, you’ll leave enough time for real candidate development. It also leaves enough time to recruit, integrate and develop talent if you find you need to bring in new leaders, such as if you don’t currently have anyone with CEO potential or lack a diverse pool of candidates.

Getting such a critical process right isn’t easy. That’s why we’ve used our decades of experience to develop adaptable tools and methods for leadership assessment. Leadership Span™, for example, helps organizations find and develop leaders who are most likely to have long-term success in C-suite roles, assessing critical candidate attributes such as emotional intelligence, resilience, self-awareness, and adaptability.

Assess the readiness of your potential CEOs

When it comes time for a change, the board has sole responsibility for choosing the next CEO. It’s a decision that will define the legacy of your organization, with the potential to drive growth for years to come or stifle every aspect of the business.

Making the right choice requires understanding more than a candidate’s potential—you need to understand their readiness.

You’ll want to prove whether candidates have the skills and experiences needed to tackle the company’s priorities and deliver the strategy. You’ll want to confirm they have the traits most associated with successful CEOs. And you’ll want to probe their cognitive and decision-making abilities.

While traditional assessment methods, such as psychometric tests, can predict capability in many of these areas, direct observation will show you whether your candidates are really ready. That’s why we’ve developed a process for running contextual immersions, which put a CEO candidate in realistic scenarios that actors play out.

By asking the candidate to step into the role of CEO in a realistic scenario, you see how they would perform in the real world. This is particularly useful in uncovering how your candidate:

develops a strategy

oversees strategy delivery

nurtures culture

leads through values and purpose

responds to challenging people

motivates and builds followership

attracts and retains top senior talent.

CEO succession planning should be constant for boards

There’s no doubt that choosing a new CEO is the biggest decision a board will make. To ensure such a change runs as smoothly as possible, CEO succession planning should be a continuous process that ensures you’re developing a group of high-potential leaders.

By starting with an unclouded vision of the skills and characteristics your next CEO will need, you’ll be able to find candidates early and nurture them to maximize their success. And by keeping that vision in mind as you practically assess those candidates, when the time for change comes, you’ll find the right CEO to drive value for all stakeholders.

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Speak to a consultant

Board and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsChief Executive OfficersBoard EffectivenessCEO Succession

The New CEO Progression Blueprint: Expanding CEO Succession Optionality During Uncertain Times

Board and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO Succession

How The Story Gets Told: Do LLMs Produce Biased Statements About CEOs?

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices