How will ChatGPT and Other Generative AI Impact Leadership? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How will ChatGPT and Other Generative AI Impact Leadership?

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

March 15, 2023

7 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnologyArtificial IntelligenceTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive summary

Chat GPT and other generative AI tools will inevitably change your business. We outline this new technology’s potential and leadership implications.

Close

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

David Finke

Palo Alto

Everyone is talking about ChatGPT. OpenAI's latest (and most popular) endeavor has been a hot topic of conversation among leaders in recent weeks, as it became the fastest growing “app” of all time. But can this powerful AI advancement really improve leadership?

To gain insight into what ChatGPT can really do, it’s helpful to have a sense of how it operates. One of a new generation of generative AI tools, ChatGPT is a large language model (LLM) designed to understand and respond to natural language inputs from humans in a conversational manner. Utilizing a vast amount of text data and applying sophisticated deep learning algorithms, it generates human-like responses to a wide range of questions and prompts.

As leaders consider effective strategies for their businesses, they must cultivate a perspective on generative AI in all its forms, the ever-evolving technology landscape, and how to ethically embed new and distinct innovations into their businesses without getting swept up in the hype of the latest tool.

There is no turning back—the next tech leap is already underway. Leaders who stay connected to the technology ecosystem and maintain a tech-readiness mindset will be best prepared to address these changes. As you plan for a future with generative AI, recognize that:

Uncertainty is inevitable; embracing it could revolutionize your business.

Generative AI can stand-alone, be integrated, or augment entire processes—each option bringing its own challenges and opportunities—but it isn’t any smarter than what you feed it.

Culture is still the core of your business: AI can’t replace moral and ethical human leadership.

Can generative AI improve the human experience of leadership?

The ongoing information explosion means we have access to more data than ever before. Now, users can employ generative AI to sift through immense amounts of data and concisely summarize key points across various fields. Additionally, according to Mira Murati, OpenAI’s CTO, these tools can also enhance personalized learning.1 Ideally, generative AI will speed up the creation of novel strategies, products, and services, helping users understand and ideate new concepts faster than ever before.

By inputting specific queries and well-organized data points, individuals can potentially use generative AI to enhance their work with increased quality and speed. The purposeful integration of generative AI into our processes—particularly those that are repetitive or manual—may help combat the culture of busyness and increase efficiency. This should enable leaders to shift an organization’s focus toward true knowledge work; that which requires time to engage in deep, strategic thinking and idea generation. It could also provide more balance between work and life—something we know leaders crave.

Given our uncertain economic environment, it’s also important to consider generative AI’s growing impact on the bottom line.2 Consider where AI could address labor shortages, effectively taking over tasks or roles of decreasing interest to humans while also providing potential cost savings.

What challenges does generative AI pose for leaders?

While there’s much to be excited about around generative AI’s potential, there are several considerations leaders need to take into account, including:

Talent displacement: Generative AI may not just eliminate repetitive work; it will likely impact white collar roles as well. These tools cut across myriad industries and jobs and, because of their sophistication, unlike basic automation, they could displace middle-skilled and high-skilled workers in a way that past technology shifts never have before.

Sub-optimal decision making: The polish with which tools like ChatGPT deliver its results increases the risk of overconfidence in unvalidated information sources. Well-packaged information can easily fool us, as it appeals to what psychologist Daniel Kahneman calls “System 1 Thinking,” in which our fast cognition makes snap judgements based on heuristics, requiring little to no effort.3

Ethics & Discrimination: There are significant concerns around weaponry, privacy, surveillance, and corruptibility. There is also risk of AI perpetuating discrimination; if trained on biased data (which we know exists in many organizations) generative AI tools could deliver discriminatory outcomes.

Skills erosion: Overreliance on AI may eventually cause human skills to wane. Our ability to scrutinize the results of a given analysis is at least partly predicated on our existing understanding. If we allow AI to become a crutch, rather than a tool, it puts our core competencies at risk.

What can leaders do to plan for continued technology transformations?

Generative AI platforms have the potential, like the internet or wireless before them, to eventually change everything. AI is already embedded into society in ways that, by now, feel natural—navigating a new city via Google Maps, unlocking a smart phone with face recognition, or using autocorrect when composing a text. When it comes to generative AI, we are in the critical “before-times,” in which leaders need to learn how to strategically integrate these tools into their organizational processes and leadership approaches in ways that feel as natural as the examples above.

As you plan for changes that AI will inevitably bring, recognize:

Uncertainty is inevitable; embracing it could revolutionize your business.

These are thrilling times. Stay open to the opportunities generative AI could create for your organization, even if you don’t have all the answers. As we learned in our Q4 2022 Monitor, economically prepared organizations strategically invest in technology advancements, versus taking ad-hoc actions motivated by buzzwords. Leaders who commit to building a tech-first culture and develop an evolving understanding of AI’s relevancy for their organizations will be most likely to find success.

Consider these technology developments against the backdrop of other recent changes, including supply chain unbundling, shifting geopolitical landscapes, and new modes of working. This is also an opportunity to engage with the broader tech ecosystem, including academics, industry experts, and next generation leaders. How might the world look when your ability to think of new products, concepts, and distributions is supercharged by AI?

Generative AI can stand-alone, be integrated into processes, or augment entire workflows—each option bringing its own challenges and opportunities—but it isn’t any smarter than what you feed it.

We haven’t uncovered all the ways these tools will alter and enhance how we work and lead, but we do know that every option will require adaptation. As with every tech leap, leaders should not expect to outsource skills or domains in which they have not built up competence, nor should they expect positive results from a tool that they haven’t learned how to employ thoughtfully. For example, those who continually outsource information interpretation may never learn or practice the art of sifting, analyzing, and framing—in short, thinking critically. Consider: if everyone started using ChatGPT extensively, who would create the good quality information for it to draw from? And who could scrutinize its analysis?

Additionally, leaders should beware of disinformation and "information degradation" over time. Generative AI tools need information bases from which to pull. If your organization has relied on incomplete or incorrect data, AI may generate equally flawed results. Don’t expect these tools to suddenly solve systemic issues.

Culture is still the core of your business: AI can’t replace moral and ethical human leadership.

Confidence in leadership is declining, even amongst fellow leaders. Not only could an overreliance on technical tools cause skills erosion, it might also negatively impact confidence in our human leaders.  C-suite, next generation leaders, and employees alike are looking for enhanced people leadership in the new frontier of work. To augment AI’s advantages, leaders need to be both agile and discerning, often stopping to consider how to wield new tools responsibly.

If we become overly reliant on generative AI, we risk abdicating our strategic responsibilities. AI might supply a new framework, but human judgment, creativity, and strategic thinking are still necessary to lead and develop effectively. Leaders should aim to meet their people with passion, authenticity, rigor, and humility. That’s something they’ll never get from a bot.

Still Think the Metaverse is a Buzzword? Five Myths About Leadership and the Next Tech Leap

Read more

Authors

Leah Christianson and Joy Tan of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight authored this report.

Learn more about the authors and The Center for Leadership Insight

The authors would like to thank the colleagues whose expert perspectives shaped these findings:

Fawad Bajwa is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers capability and leads the firm’s artificial intelligence work globally. He is based in Toronto.

David Finke  is a senior board, CEO and C-Suite advisor in Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology practice.  He is based in Palo Alto.

Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.

Harpreet Khurana is Russell Reynolds Associates’ chief digital and data analytics officer. He is based in New York.

Andrew Wood is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Strategy & Development team. He is based in Houston.

References

1Jordan Hart, “OpenAI CTO Says ChatGPT Can Improve Learning in Classrooms,” Business Insider, February 5, 2023.
2 Michael Chui, Bryce Hall, Alex Singla, Alex Sukharevsky, “The state of AI in 2021,” McKinsey, December 2021.
3 Daniel Kahneman, “Of 2 Minds: How Fast and Slow Thinking Shape Perception and Choice,” Scientific American, June 15, 2022.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices