Supply Chains: From Out of Sight To Front and Center on the Board Agenda | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Supply Chains: From Out of Sight To Front and Center on the Board Agenda

Leadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsLeadershipConsumerIndustrialBoard and CEO AdvisoryOperations and Supply Chain OfficersBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

September 04, 2023

7 min

Leadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsLeadershipConsumerIndustrialBoard and CEO AdvisoryOperations and Supply Chain OfficersBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Is supply chain expertise required in the boardroom? Our research uncovers an increased demand for this skillset in board director searches.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Andrew Hayes

Houston
New York

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Supply chains have become an increasingly crucial board priority. Here’s why.

Supply chains have always been vulnerable to disruption, but our current combined crises of COVID-19’s after-effects, the ongoing war in Ukraine, and ripples from recent trade wars have caused disturbances at never-before-seen magnitudes. Furthermore, increased expectations from internal and external stakeholders to operationalize sustainability have resulted in supply chain functions taking a more central role in the sustainability journey. Recent changes in universal proxy rules are likely to result in more challenges to boards from single issue activists/groups (e.g., climate and sustainability). Consequently, supply chains have become a strategic priority for many organizations, shifting them from out of sight to front and center on C-suite and—in an increasingly significant trend—board agendas.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we have seen an increased demand for this expertise in board director searches. To quantify and better understand this, we assessed how best in class supply chain organizations are governed, focusing on operations and supply chain expertise more broadly. We then narrowed our focus to supply chain expertise by analyzing thousands of the board director mandates from our client executions over the last five years - to understand the skills, competencies and experience organizations look for when hiring board members.

Our assessment revealed that best-in-class organizations have operations and supply chain expertise represented in the boardroom. Our proprietary data confirms a consistent demand for supply chain expertise across industries, with a notable uptick in demand across consumer-focused industry sectors.

Best in class organizations have operations and supply chain expertise in the boardroom

To understand how the best-in-class supply chain organizations are governed, we assessed the top 10 firms from Gartner’s 2022 Supply Chain Top 25.1 Additionally, we examined the five organizations that Gartner lists as “Masters.”* We learned that:

All 15 of these organizations have explicit operations and/or supply chain expertise in the boardroom

60% of these organizations have 4 or more board directors with senior operations and/or supply chain experience

Nearly all (13 out of 15) have operations and supply chain leaders reporting directly to the CEO or in the C-suite

The current CEOs of 8 of these 15 organizations have, at some point in their career, worked in a senior operations and/or supply chain role

See Figure 1 for more details.

Figure 1: Count of Gartner Top 25 organizations by number of board members with operations and supply chain expertise

Source: Corporate websites of the 15 organizations - data captured in March and April 2023.
* Masters: companies that have attained top-five composite scores for at least seven out of the last 10 years.

Below, we’ll take a more in depth look into three of these companies: Apple, Procter & Gamble (P&G) (both from Gartner’s “Masters” list), and Colgate-Palmolive (ranked #3 in 2022).

Apple: 6 out of 9 board members have operations and/or supply chain experience and the firm has 2 operations executives in the C-suite. Apple’s CEO, Tim Cook, is a prime example of a successful CEO who worked his way to the top through manufacturing, distribution, procurement, supply chain, and operations roles.2

P&G: 5 out of 11 board members have worked in senior operations, logistics or transportation roles, and 1 member worked as the chief operating officer (COO) and is now the CEO of FedEx. The firm’s COO sits in the C-suite and leads among other functions P&G’s market operations, purchasing, manufacturing, and distribution. The current CEO and board chair also held the COO role prior to taking the top job.3

Colgate-Palmolive: 7 out of 11 board members have worked in senior operations and/or procurement roles, and the firm’s chief supply chain officer is part of the C-suite. The current CEO and board chair also held the COO role.4

Increased demand for supply chain expertise in consumer organizations’ boardrooms

For a board to function effectively, it needs the right mix of skills, expertise, and experience among its directors. To understand the demand for supply chain expertise—and whether that demand has changed—we analyzed thousands of board position specifications across the Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific from 2018 thru 2022.

At a global level, our analysis show a consistent and slightly upward trending demand for supply chain expertise across all industries. The consumer sector has seen the most increased demand, followed by the industrial & natural resources sector. Regionally, demand for this talent at the board level is strongest in the Americas, followed by EMEA and Asia Pacific.

Globally, over 70% of all RRA board searches that seek out supply chain expertise occur within the consumer sector and industrial & natural resources sector. While demand in the industrial & natural resources sector has been fairly consistent over the last five years, consumer sector demand has doubled, accounting for almost 14% of RRA’s board search mandates in 2022 (Figure 2). Our board-level findings correlate with the Boston Consulting Group’s cross-sector CEO Outlook study, which surveyed ~800 C-suite leaders in 2023, finding that the consumer and industrial sectors both rank supply chain and operations themes (e.g., supplier diversification) in their top three investment priorities for 2023.5

Within the consumer sector specifically, data shows a clear uptick starting the latter half of 2020 – correlated with the beginnings of the pandemic-induced global supply chain disruption. The demand has continued to grow in prevalence since that time.

Figure 2: Annual demand for supply chain expertise in the boardroom – Consumer sector globally

Source: RRA board director specification analysis, n = 2,195, 2018-2022.

Note: We have identified board candidate role descriptions that sought expertise, skills and experience in end-to-end supply chain process, exclusively or as one of the essential or desired qualifications. Areas of expertise include supply chain, procurement, sourcing, logistics, and manufacturing.

In the US market, demand for this expertise is above global average and notably higher in the consumer sector, where over 24% of board candidate searches sought out supply chain expertise in 2022 (Figure 3). Given that typical boards range from 8 to 14 members and the mix of diverse skillsets and perspectives are what make an effective board, 24% is significant and well above the global average.

Figure 3: Annual demand for supply chain expertise in the boardroom – Consumer sector in the US

Source: RRA board director specification analysis, n = 2,195, 2018-2022.

Note: We have identified board candidate role descriptions that sought expertise, skills and experience in end-to-end supply chain process, exclusively or as one of the essential or desired qualifications. Areas of expertise include supply chain, procurement, sourcing, logistics, and manufacturing.

Recommendations for incorporating supply chain talent into future boards

As the demands on boards become greater, chairs and nomination committees are looking for T-shaped directors with deep expertise in at least one domain, as well as an ability to contribute broadly. Supply chain management is emerging as an area of increased interest and relevance. Clients seek out talent ranging from CEOs and GMs of firms where supply chain is a strategic advantage to C-suite executives that have directly led complex value chains.

When assessing if the board is effective, companies should focus on current and future needs. Supply chain expertise is not required in every boardroom, but organizations should assess whether it belongs in the mix of skills for their industry and specific situation.

Supply chain considerations:

Is the supply chain a source of strategic advantage in your industry?

Does supply chain complexity warrant governance oversight?

Has the supply chain risk profile changed from a business and/or sustainability perspective?

Broader board considerations:

Does your board have the right mix of backgrounds, skills, and experiences to thrive?

Will it remain effective in the future, given anticipated challenges and opportunities?

Beyond board composition, organizations should assess their board evaluation process given changed stakeholder needs.

Figure 4: How can your board make its evaluations more effective?

When it comes to board evaluations, one size does not fit all. Each process should be customized to deliver the greatest return on investment. As part of that customization process, boards should consider five key design questions:

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates, “Is your Board Effective?”2022.

Establishing a thoughtful board evaluation process allow directors and executives to assess if their board is effective—just remember, with evaluations, one size does not fit all. As supply chains become an increasingly crucial board priority, external advisors can provide valuable perspectives, ensuring that your board has the right skillset for success.

Authors

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Dallas.
Andrew Hayes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Products Practice Globally.  He co-locates between New York and Houston.
Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in the Americas. He is based in Toronto.
Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.
Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.
Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.

Sources

1 Mike Griswold. May 26, 2022. The Gartner Supply Chain Top 25 for 2022. Gartner. https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/the-gartner-supply-chain-top-25-for-2022
2 Apple website. Captured April 6 2023. https://www.apple.com/ca/leadership/
3 The Procter & Gamble Company website. Captured April 11, 2023. https://us.pg.com/leadership-team/
4 Colgate-Palmolive website. Captured March 30, 2023. https://www.colgatepalmolive.com/en-us/who-we-are/our-leadership-team
5 Boston Consulting Group. April 6, 2023. CEO Outlook 2023: Caution, Optimism, and Navigating the Road Ahead. https://www.bcg.com/en-ca/publications/2023/ceo-outlook-navigating-the-road-ahead

Supply Chains: From Out of Sight To Front and Center on the Board Agenda

Download full article

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices