Why Social Skills Are So Important for C-suite Executives—And How To Measure Them | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why Social Skills Are So Important for C-suite Executives—And How To Measure Them

Board and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Article

July 11, 2022

5 min

Board and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Executive Summary

What are you looking for when hiring C-suite leaders? More companies are now prioritizing social skills over traditional operational and finance competencies.

Close

Today’s most effective leaders are different to the ones of old. Command and control structures are, for the most part, a thing of the past. CEOs rarely hide away in a corner office on the top floor anymore. And C-suite executives no longer work in siloes; they actively collaborate with each other and the CEO.

These are the visible signs of a fundamental shift in how leaders lead. As companies and their top teams see the conditions for success are changing faster than ever, and employees demand leaders who appeal to their values, priorities, empathies and hopes, soft skills are becoming critical to the C-suite.

To explore whether companies are making a conscious effort to adapt leadership styles to match the changing world, we partnered with faculty members from Harvard Business School and Imperial College London to leverage machine learning tools to analyze 5,000 anonymized C-suite job descriptions from the last 20 years. As we explored in the Harvard Business Review,  we found that between 2000 and 2017 companies decreased mentions of strength in managing financial and material resources by almost 40% and increased mentions of strong social skills by almost 30%.

What’s causing the shift?

The analysis suggested four factors are causing the shift towards soft skills.

1. Organization size and complexity
The focus on social skills is especially clear in large firms—as well as publicly listed multinationals and those that engage in mergers and acquisitions.

As organizations become more complex, top executives must be able to coordinate specialist teams, manage a multitude of relationships with outside partners and stakeholders, and communicate powerfully with their employees. For all those tasks, it helps to be able to interact well with others.

2. Technology-based operations
When, in 1966, management maestro Peter Drucker wrote, “The more we automate information-handling, the more we will have to create opportunities for effective communication,” even he wouldn’t have imagined to what extent this would become true.

As companies use technology to automate routine tasks, demand is growing for “human skills”, such as judgment, creativity, and perceptiveness—skills that computers don’t have (at least yet).

3. Social media
Historically, CEOs weren’t constantly in the public eye. But the rise of both social media, which can capture and publicize missteps instantly, and platforms like Slack, which let employees discuss their bosses in real time, has changed this.

Gone are the days when leaders only needed to explain things to boards and leadership teams at a set time and place. Today, they are always accessible. And as commentary on their decisions becomes instant, poor communication, even in the eyes of just a handful of people, can have big consequences.

4. Diversity, equity, and inclusion
Organizations are, rightly, putting ever greater importance on diversity, equity, and inclusion. A big part of this is CEOs and other senior leaders dealing with issues publicly, empathetically, and proactively. And that demands strong social skills.

Leaders who can perceive the mental states of others can more easily interact with various employee groups, make them feel heard, and represent their interests. More importantly, they can nurture an environment in which diverse talent thrives.

How can organizations attract and develop this new breed of leader?

With social skills more vital to leadership success than ever before, organizations will need to focus on two areas as they hire and cultivate new members of their top teams.

1. Develop social skills in up-and-coming leaders
Traditionally, organizations cultivated future leaders by rotating them through critical departments and functions, posting them to various geographic locations, and putting them through executive development programs.

In this environment, social skills mattered—the ability to quickly form constructive relationships with new colleagues, customers, regulators, and suppliers affected performance. But such skills were a means to achieving operational goals, so there was rarely explicit, systematic, and objective evaluation and development of them.

In executive development programs today, organizations need to define ways to evaluate and develop social skills, and even prioritize them over the “hard” skills they currently favor. One way to do this is to put high-potential leaders in positions where they need to interact with various internal and external stakeholders, and closely watch how they perform.

2. Assess the social skills of candidates
Historic assessment criteria for C-suite candidates, such as work history, technical qualifications, and career trajectory, don’t tell you a lot about social skills. So, organizations will need innovative approaches to candidate assessment.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we psychometrically test candidates to understand their personality traits. This helps us match the candidates with organizations, and it can shed light on people’s social skills. For example, it can accurately assess whether someone is outgoing and comfortable with strangers, how well they can communicate to bring people together, and whether or not they are self-aware and their willingness to share their vulnerabilities with others.

It could also be possible to develop artificial intelligence tools to assess C-suite candidates’ social skills. There are already interesting algorithms assessing other skills across the workforce, and organizations could adapt them to examine their top teams.

Great C-suite leaders must have great social skills

In a technology-driven world with more engaged and empowered stakeholders, the need for leaders to have outstanding social skills is clear. The good news is, organizations are already looking for such leaders, although it’s likely to be a subconscious shift.

Going forward, the question will be whether companies can actively develop and hire this new breed of leader. The answer will largely depend on whether they choose to effectively evaluate the social skills of candidates, and whether they make the cultivation of social skills integral to their talent-management strategies.

Author

PJ Neal is the Global Head of Knowledge and Operations, Board and CEO Advisory Partners. He is based in Boston.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices