The Future of MedTech Leadership: Where Product, Technology and Clinical Evidence Intersect | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Future of MedTech Leadership:  Where Product, Technology and Clinical Evidence Intersect

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationHealthcareTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Article

Stacy Braun

December 06, 2022

5 min

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationHealthcareTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

We sat down with Nabil Shabshab to dive deeper into the changes that are occurring in the connected devices landscape and what it means for future leaders.

Close

Stacy Braun

New York

The future of patient care is migrating from acute settings to the home and the pandemic served to accelerate the uptake of a disruptive segment of MedTech – connected devices. These devices enable remote physiologic monitoring, providing decision support for patients managing their disease or remote therapeutic care, and serve to enhance patient-provider communications while improving outcomes.

Inogen is a MedTech company offering innovative respiratory products for use in the homecare setting. The company is executing on its transformation journey by instilling clinically-informed discipline in innovation, product development practices and go-to-market strategy. Inogen has an integrated innovation strategy focused on expanding collaboration with health care practitioners and technology experts to develop clinical solutions that support patients, enhance market position and drive value for shareholders.

Between the increased acceptance of these technologies and the nature of the product portfolios including smart devices, software and services, the skillsets and competencies for future CEOs of connected device companies is evolving. Increasingly, the route to the top will be at the intersection of product, technology, and clinical evidence. This unique blend has become a powerful flywheel propelling MedTech companies forward through continued innovation and growth.

Russell Reynolds Associates sat down with Nabil Shabshab, Chief Executive Officer at Inogen Inc., to dive deeper into the changes that are occurring in the MedTech landscape and what it means for the future leaders in MedTech.

What is the connected device organization?

Increasingly, MedTech organizations are orienting their product portfolio towards connected devices with value-added services. In turn, innovation and product development disciplines are becoming more complex and should evolve from their traditional approach (Figure 1).

This evolution can be characterized in the following areas:

leveraging device data, analytics, and (in some instances) algorithms to optimize the functionality of a medical device in real time, necessitating a complementary, but often nascent data strategy, including data acquisitions, integration, mining and data sciences;

evolving role of software and firmware in support of “value-add” components of the overall offering. Future optimal device performance moves beyond feature-functionality and focuses on how the innovation will lighten the burdens on patients managing their diseases. Release cycles accelerate and are more informed, fueled by constant streams of patient data providing clinical evidence.  As a result, “next generation” devices are no longer restricted to designing and commercializing a new product. New release cycles are not only “new and improved”, but also propelled by the clinical evidence, and further enhanced through the performance of digital health and value-add elements;

understanding how the technology, clinical evidence, and regulatory pathways differ from the traditional standalone device and can be more complex regardless of the overall offering providing “decision support” or “closed loop” functionality;

strategizing around securing reimbursement and in doing so clearing the hurdle around potential clinical and / or HEOR evidence for a device plus value-added service, which inherently is a higher overall bar.

As a result of organizations orienting more towards connected devices, their talent needs are changing. Together with Mr. Shabshab, Russell Reynolds uncovered what this digital transformation means for the future product, technology, and clinical leaders and the future MedTech CEO.

New product innovation & the chief product officer

The connected device space—with its increased use of SaaS, data, analytics, and AI—is pulling from the tech industry to define its product function. Traditionally considered a product management role with an ability to segment markets and bring the voice of the customer to R&D organizations, the connected device product function has become more refined.

Product leaders bring highly systematized thinking, a basic threshold of technical knowledge, and a market sensing capability to push the team on the art of what is possible.

– Stacy Braun, RRA

Product leaders bring highly systematized thinking, a basic threshold of technical knowledge, and a market sensing capability to push the team on the art of what is possible. Not only do these leaders consider what to build and why, they must also be well-versed in their organization’s business model, including the rationale on what to release today versus in three or four quarters. These leaders establish the right framework for customer feedback and are relentless about creating monetizable value from data and digital health services.

Technology innovation and the chief technology officer

The chief technology officer serves to balance the lenses of technology, regulatory, quality and commercial requirements. These leaders oversee the different innovation variables, how they move together and ways in which to enhance their offerings’ interconnected nature. They develop the framework that creates a high functioning R&D organization, with a focus on meeting customer demands, regulatory requirements, and high quality standards. Technology leaders develop and execute the technology roadmap and serve as the lynchpin for all engineering (mechanical, electrical, sensors, etc.) and software (mobile app, cloud, AI, etc.) functions. Increasingly, as connected device companies move to a more consumer-centric experience, R&D organizations are working in tandem to provide more rapid care delivery, enabling a bespoke customer experience.

Strategic clinical and regulatory inputs and the chief medical officer

Today, new product requirements are much more clinically-oriented. The chief medical officer is vital in helping the broader leadership team understand the clinical strategy and how it plays into the broader product roadmap. Strategic leaders of medical affairs ensure that a clinical voice is present —although not overwhelming— at the table. That voice is utilized to develop capabilities or behaviors that will clinically validate the product, including implications for regulatory clearances. Given that an organization must anticipate what the FDA will ask about a device’s risk management and clinical benefits, chief medical officers help translate those variables to the engineering team with an eye toward health, economic, and outcome research, as well as reimbursement strategy.

The future CEO of connected device organizations

Evolving needs in the C-suite are paving the way for future connected device CEOs to have a different upbringing and leadership opportunities than their pre-pandemic counterparts.

– Nabil Shabshab

The future connected device CEO will need a combined skillset of product, technology, clinical, and commercial acumen, as well as the ability to collaborate and culturally unite these teams. Successful leaders have the right integrative mindset and a high degree of learning agility, as well as an appreciation for how these functions are motivated and structured. CEOs who are able to create a vision and build momentum behind the necessary flywheel will be able to master the challenges associated with both rapid innovation and the organizational transformation that ensues. Effective CEOs in this space embrace the evolving business model and drive value creation while creating strong followership around a long-term strategy.

Connected devices and digital health have been part of the evolving business model for the last 10 years. After a pandemic-induced acceleration, home care and the use of connected devices are now widely accepted across the healthcare industry. This set off a trend of evolving needs in C-suite, paving the way for future connected device CEOs with demonstrably different backgrounds to embrace a new set of leadership opportunities.

Authors

Stacy Braun is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Medical Devices, Tools and Diagnostics practice. She is based in New York.
Victoria Fibig is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare knowledge management team. She is based in New York.
Sarah Flören leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare knowledge management team. She is based in Amsterdam.

We would like to thank Nabil Shabshab and Inogen for their valuable insights and collaboration on this important leadership topic.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices