The New Philanthropists: The World is Changing, So Must Philanthropy | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The New Philanthropists: The World is Changing, So Must Philanthropy

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsInclusionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationFamily BusinessLeadershipSocial ImpactEducationExecutive Search

Article

July 29, 2022

2 min

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsInclusionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceTransformation and InnovationFamily BusinessLeadershipSocial ImpactEducationExecutive Search

Executive Summary

A new generation of philanthropist has a role to play in addressing society’s challenges, but must structure their orgs to fit the new reality.

Close

Jamie Hechinger

Washington DC

Tory Clark

Atlanta
Washington DC

Katie Nivard

San Francisco

It is clear—the world is changing. What is less clear is how the philanthropic world will change alongside it.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we work with the world’s leading philanthropic and social impact organizations, advising them on their most pressing strategic leadership and organizational challenges. Our intersectional and global perspective provides a broad view into the ways in which philanthropic organizations are experimenting with new models of impact, and the ways in which a new cohort of philanthropists is innovating within the existing model. The scale at which these new funders are operating – sometimes several orders of magnitude larger than traditional, legacy foundations – has the potential to significantly amplify impact on many of society’s most pressing needs. However, given the sector’s systemic challenges, the rise of “new philanthropy” also has the potential to reinforce power imbalances, enable arrogance masked as innovation and, despite earnest intention, reaffirm systemic inequity.

How can these new organizations – whether foundations, donor collectives or venture funds – make the most of this unique moment to leverage their considerable resources for the greatest impact? What is clear is that there is no single way to “do” philanthropy, and every organization must choose the models, channels and instruments that are best suited to their theory of change. Often, this requires blending the best elements of traditional philanthropy with the best new ideas from emerging philanthropic models, while recognizing the unique role that “new philanthropists” can play as providers of catalytic financial and political capital.

Amidst this flurry of new capital, significant forces are shaping how and why philanthropic organizations operate

Compounding crises

The combined crises of COVID-19, the overdue reckoning with racial injustice, climate change and geo-political instability have created a fundamentally new landscape to which funders must respond. Philanthropists must be cognizant of how these crises have both changed the social needs that must be addressed, as well as the levers that can be pulled to address them.

Convergence of interests and actors

Public, private, and philanthropic interests are converging in increasingly new and innovative ways, highlighting the opportunity for shared leadership and greater impact when these forces align. The global experience of responding to the COVID-19 crisis illustrates what is possible when these forces align. Venture philanthropy, impact investing, and blended finance vehicles offer new ways to support social interventions that respond to these actors’ varying risk tolerances, enabling greater collaboration in pursuit of shared goals.

Models of collaboration

The COVID-19 pandemic has changed how philanthropists collaborate – both literally, in the case of remote working and virtual convening, as well as conceptually, in the case of new collective impact initiatives. Both types of changes require philanthropists to reconsider operating norms to identify new modes of working that may increase overall impact.

Challenges to “Big Philanthropy”

The so-called “non-profit industrial complex” is under increasing scrutiny amidst accusations that most philanthropy is unaccountable, restricted, non-transparent, donor-directed, and tax-subsidized. As more philanthropists seek to leverage their wealth to effect lasting change, they must reckon with the increased need to prove the feasibility of their intended impact.

Harnessing catalytic capital – both political and financial

The emerging cohort of new philanthropists share some similarities (as well as critical differences) from their earlier counterparts. Industrialists such as Andrew Carnegie or John D. Rockefeller gave significant sums to social causes, such as the creation of free public libraries and development of life-saving vaccines. Both groups have sought to leverage their considerable wealth for the betterment of society, with some like Carnegie seeing it as a moral obligation to “give back” their fortunes to the society that helped enrich them.

However, the new cohort of philanthropists diverge from their predecessors in the scope and scale of their interventions. While the creation of a public library
system or vaccine for yellow fever were no doubt massively impactful at the time, they represent targeted and incremental progress for social good. Today’s
philanthropists increasingly seek to effect systems-level change, no longer content to “move the needle” for discrete populations or precise causes, instead seeking to propel transformative social change. Even the legacy organizations of the previous era of philanthropists – such as the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations – have shifted the scope of their work to systems-level impact.

Many of these new philanthropists have met frustrating roadblocks as they seek to harness revolutionary intent within a social landscape more accustomed to evolutionary change. Often current or former chief executives of tech firms and other disruptive industries, these philanthropists are habituated to developing a “big idea” and working with leaders who report directly to them in order to drive quick results. Entering the complicated and multi-faceted world of philanthropy often prompts frustration at the speed of progress and necessity for multi-stakeholder consultation.

To focus their revolutionary ambitions within the frame of what’s possible, these new philanthropists would be best served by recognizing the unique role they can play in providing catalytic capital to “de-risk” the revolution. Importantly, the capital they can provide is not just financial, but also political. As the third major stakeholder group responsible for driving progress – alongside the public and private sectors – these philanthropists can often assume risk that the other two groups cannot. The myriad social challenges the world will face in the next century – racial injustice, gender inequality and global instability writ large– requires that we innovate, test and scale solutions at a pace never before seen. Borrowing from the parlance of the tech world, we have to fail fast in order to find solutions that will last.

Both governments and private companies struggle with this approach in the context of social change – governments that fail fast are rarely rewarded for their attempts at the voting booth, and companies that continually to fail fast won’t stay in business for long. Philanthropy, meanwhile, is in the perfect position to experiment with new ideas to discover what works without the same specter of immediate consequences.

For their part, most governments and private companies appear ready and willing to let philanthropy assume this catalytic role. Whether structured as a formal product development partnership (PDP), public-private partnership (PPP) or more loosely affiliated coalition, there is a role for engaged philanthropies as the guarantor of sectoral initiatives. They are able to incentivize collaboration between competitors and reach policymakers with positive advocacy, as opposed to lobbying.

New models for old challenges

Beyond their role within the broader ecosystem for change, philanthropic organizations have also begun to rethink many of the norms and operating models for what happens within their walls. In doing so, organizations must consider the range of tools, structures and levers available to them when determining how to achieve outcomes. These elements are the backbone of an organization’s theory of change, as critical to define as the mission and intended impact.

Whether starting an organization from scratch or reorienting an existing one, leaders should consider the spectrum of options available to them, and the implications for the type of leadership required.

Funder motivations

The circumstances motivating a funder to invest their capital in philanthropic pursuits has implications for the type of leadership needed to steward those investments. Donors who are motivated primarily by personal passions or desire for tax optimization may benefit from appointing an existing colleague or executive from their family office to lead philanthropic efforts, knowing that their understanding of the funder’s priorities, preferred channels of impact and investment philosophy will ensure that funds are deployed in line with the funder’s wishes. Conversely, funders who are first and foremost motivated by a desire to create lasting social change should consider appointing leaders with deeper technical expertise in their desired area of impact. These might be visionary leaders who can translate donor intent into scalable and actual impact. They are likely to play a more external role than the former model, galvanizing other funders and have a capacity-building (vs. traditional grantmaking) mindset.

Operating model

Historically, foundations have been structured as non-profit entities, either as a 501c3 or 501c4 in the US, or other type of designated charity. New models are emerging – including Limited Liability Corporations (LLCs) and other unrestricted forprofit tax structures – that forego some of the tax incentives of these charitable designations in favor of greater flexibility in terms of disbursements and governance. Funders employing newer models may benefit from appointing leaders with experience in startup environments.

Theory of change

Some funders may orient their strategy and theory of change around incremental, targeted investments that result in more immediate change but for a narrower set of stakeholders; for example, teacher training programs to improve literacy rates in underserved communities. In these cases, organizations will benefit from leadership with deeper technical understanding of the issue at hand. Others may focus their efforts around holistic systems change that may take longer to yield results but are much broader in their scope and ultimate impact – for example, advocacy campaigns to secure free primary education for all children. In these cases, organizations would benefit from leadership with experience working in partnership with other organizations and stakeholders, including fellow social impact organizations, governments, academia and the private sector.

Funding vehicles

In contrast to traditional philanthropic funding structures that involve the distribution of grants, new forms of “blended finance” vehicles have emerged that are more akin to venture capital investments, where some return (even if lower than a market rate) is excepted. In reviewing job specifications and our proprietary psychometric data for CEOs from both types of funding structures, we found interesting commonalities and differences:

Traditional grant-makers are effective at connecting dots, tend to focus on the big picture, and typically bring a strong understanding of systemic reform and experience working in complex organizations. They are risk-takers with a bias towards action, capable of operating amidst significant ambiguity. They are highly effective team-builders, capable of building personal connections while maintaining a humble leadership style. They may prefer to build deep meaningful connections with others over broad network-building, a trait that is particularly well suited to working with sole or family donors.

Leaders of blended finance organizations share many qualities with their grant-making peers, – and to be sure, are more akin to each other than they are to corporate counterparts – but the groups are differentiated in a few keys ways. While also capable of taking risks, blended finance leaders place higher focus on feasibility and the need to convert strategies into workable tactics, and are typically more skilled at filtering innovation and simplifying complex ideas. They tend to be more entrepreneurial and possess a structured approach to strategy development. They combine their broad perspectives on geopolitics and business, with a strong focus on details and results measurement, resulting in effective campaigns and partnerships.

Both types of funding structures require leaders who demonstrate a personal and professional commitment to inclusion, and an ability to work across multiple cultures around the world.

An evolving landscape with evolving solutions

While these perspectives are based on our experience advising funders who are currently experimenting with these new philanthropy models, this field is evolving so rapidly that best practices and innovations are changing at a pace that challenges even the most expert practitioners.

As such, Russell Reynolds is embarking on a collective research effort to better understand the organizational structures, leadership profiles and governance practices that will define this next era of philanthropy. Future publications in this series seek to answer questions such as:

What are the various chief executive archetypes that are best suited to each model?

What are the questions a board must ask itself when embarking on a search for its inaugural leader, and what will the funder’s role be?

How should organizations think about building a senior leadership team, and what is the correct order of appointment for functional roles such as Chief Financial Officer, Chief People Officer and others?

Whether you are a funder yourself, a practitioner with experience working in new philanthropic entities, or part of a social impact organization that has received funding from these new philanthropies, we welcome your thoughts on the questions above. Designing the new paradigm of philanthropy requires a concerted and collective effort to identify the best practices that will propel impact and create lasting change.

Additional Authors

Jamie Hechinger co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education sector. She is based in Washington DC.
Simon Kingston co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education sector. He is based in London.
Tory Clark leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Justice practice. She is based in Atlanta.
Katie Nivard is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education sector. She is based in San Francisco.
Nick Ricketts is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education sector. He is based in London.
Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education and Sustainability Knowledge teams. She is based in Portland.
Vanessa Di Matteo is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education and Sustainability Knowledge teams. She is based in London.
Ruben Hillar is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Pure Consulting Knowledge team. He is based in Chicago.

The New Philanthropists: The World is Changing, So Must Philanthropy

Download article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices