What Keeps C-Suite Operations & Supply Chain Leaders Up at Night? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Keeps C-Suite Operations & Supply Chain Leaders Up at Night

Leadership StrategiesCulture RiskOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchCulture AnalyticsTeam Performance

Article

+ 1 author

February 23, 2023

7 min

Leadership StrategiesCulture RiskOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchCulture AnalyticsTeam Performance

Executive summary

Only one third of operations & supply chain leaders believe their company is prepared to address their top concern—uncertain economic growth.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Gregory Gerin

Brussels

Vijuraj Eranazhath

Mumbai
New Delhi

C-suite operations & supply chain leaders refers to C-suite operations, procurement and supply chain executives.

The unprecedented change of the past few years have placed C-suite operations & supply chain leaders on the frontlines of disruption, asking them to navigate through challenges while delivering on customer expectations. With prolonged challenges, the roles of those leaders are far from “business as usual.”  For these reasons, we engaged a number of C-suite operations & supply chain executives to understand what most concerns these leaders in today’s environment.

Via Russell Reynolds Associates’ Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, we identified the top risks leaders are perceiving, as well as how prepared executives feel to address these threats to organizational health. Interestingly—despite the probability of recession and continued uncertainty—investing in retaining critical talent surfaced as a clear priority among operations & supply chain leaders, outranking traditional levers such as cost-cutting and business optimization. In fact, the lowest ranking recession measure is workforce reduction, which speaks to the continued importance of talent and how talent is seen as such a competitive advantage in today’s environment (Figure 1). We also identified perspective differences between operations & supply chain executives and CEOs that, when embraced, can help improve C-suite effectiveness and build a healthier risk management culture.

Figure 1:  Most important ways for operations & supply chain leaders to respond to a recession

Source: RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Q4 2022, base n = 56 C-level Operations, Procurement and Supply Chain executives

Uncertain economic growth is the most pressing concern for operations & supply chain leaders

Around 82% of operations & supply chain leaders rank uncertain economic growth as the most pressing concern for their organization over the next 12 to 18 months. This unseats the availability of key talent, which ranked as the top threat in our previous Monitor in Q2 2022. However, talent availability still ranks as one the top threats for operations & supply chain leaders. Surprisingly, operations & supply chain leaders do not think more talent will come available during a recession, meaning that organizations will likely try to hold on to current talent. About 95% of surveyed executives think we are already in a recession or will enter one in 2023, with 64% predicting a recession that lasts 6 to 12 month and 24% anticipating one that continues 12 months or longer.

Operations & supply chain leaders and CEOs share the same top six concerns, but operations & supply chain leaders are consistently more worried about each of these risks (Figure 2). There is a notable gap between the two groups’ concerns around uncertain economic growth (82% vs. 65%) and changes in consumer behavior (49% vs. 35%). According to our 2022 Consumer CEO Review, these consumer behavior shifts include a heightened focus on ESG, increased adoption of digital channels, continued economic and geopolitical disruptions causing rapid shifts in spending habits, and increased focus on health and wellness in consumption. Notably, these differences did not exist in our Q2 2022 Monitor, meaning that over the last six months, CEOs and operations & supply chain leaders have drifted apart with respect to their opinions on leading threats, highlighting a potential lack of alignment in the midst of continued disruption.

Figure 2:  Top external factors impacting business in 2023 – operations & supply chain leaders vs. CEOs

Source: RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Q4 2022, base n = 86 C-level Operations, Procurement and Supply Chain executives, base n = 294 CEOs.

Only one third of operations & supply chain leaders believe their organization is prepared to address uncertain economic growth

In addition to understanding what leaders perceive as top threats, we also wanted to understand how prepared leadership felt to respond to those threats (Figure 3). We found that only 36% of operations & supply chain leaders think their organization is well prepared to respond to uncertain economic growth—the top ranking risk. CEOs feel similarly (only 41% feel prepared), indicating that after years of uncertainty, both of these cohorts continue to experience the pressure of today’s unique business environment.

Notably, CEOs feel much more prepared than operations & supply chain leaders to address return to office / hybrid work implementations (74% vs. 52%) and changes in consumer behavior (48% vs. 31%). Virtual and flexible work arrangements can be more difficult for operations & supply chain roles to implement, making this topic a continued source of complexity and sensitivity, especially in organizations where productivity improved during the pandemic.

Figure 3:  Leadership preparedness to address external risks in 2023 – operations & supply chain leaders vs. CEOs

Source: RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor Q4 2022, base n = 86 C-level Operations, Procurement and Supply Chain executives, base n = 294 CEOs.

To address these risks, organizations must remain determined in the face of an uncertain future – this especially applies to leadership. At Russell Reynolds, we define “team resiliency” through seven factors, ranging from persistence and optimism to flexibility and adaptability (Figure 4). Resilient leaders know how to stay balanced, focused, realistic, and optimistic in the face of challenge and can flexibly address the needs of their teams and organizations.

Figure 4: RRA’s seven factors of resilience

Source:  RRA’s 7 factors of resilience

Looking ahead: how to achieve greater alignment amongst C-suite executives

At Russell Reynolds, we advise clients on “Top Team Effectiveness,” which outlines the four priorities high performing teams must embrace. Senior team alignment on external and internal factors affecting organizational health is crucial to success (Figure 5).

Figure 5:  Opposing priorities for high performing Top Teams

Source:  RRA’s top team effectiveness overview

Our research shows clear differences between operations & supply chain and CEO cohorts’ priorities. Inconsistent perspectives within the C-suite can result in leadership team members operating from different rulebooks, which introduces significant organizational risk. To address this disconnect and de-risk the C-suite, organizations can:

Engage in honest dialogue about risks and risk preparedness to improve consistency in top-down role modeling and build healthier, effective, and aligned C-suites. By listening with intent and authenticity; challenging constructively, especially around external factors where disconnect between operations & supply chain leaders and CEOs is most notable; and, finally, putting a premium on transparency, leaders can gain a deeper understanding of their fellow leaders’ priorities, and form a better informed consensus on risk prioritization.

To gain a full view of a prioritized list of problems, leaders can utilize more advanced behavioral diagnostics. In our experience, this method leads to powerful group level insights about people’s real beliefs and behaviors. (To learn more about culture imaging, see our paper, “Measurement Mindset: A Practical Approach for Understanding Culture.”)

C-suite operations & supply chain roles have evolved over the years and the chief operating officer (COO) role, for example, is more strategic and transformational than ever before. In fact, in 2021, more CEOs were promoted from the COO role in Fortune 500 and S&P 500 firms than from any other internal role.1 C-suite operations & supply chain leaders should be given equal stature to other C-suite leaders. Ensuring that operations & supply chain leaders have a seat at the table and the opportunity to voice concerns, even if other members of the C-suite are prioritizing differently, will improve overall alignment.

Concurrently, organizations need to continue to build resiliency in leadership, whether through recruitment or internal development. In a world with prolonged change and disruptions, resilient operations & supply chain leaders are best equipped for success.

References

1 McKinsey. October 31, 2022. Stepping up: What COOs will need to succeed in 2023 and beyond. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/operations/our-insights/stepping-up-what-coos-will-need-to-succeed-in-2023-and-beyond

Authors

Ben Shrewsbury leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability globally. He is based in Dallas.

Fawad Bajwa leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in the Americas. He is based in Toronto.

Gregory Gerin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in EMEA. He is based in Brussels.

Vijuraj Eranazhath leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability in Asia Pacific. He is based in Mumbai.

Mika Nurminen leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Operations & Supply Chain Officers capability. He is based in Toronto.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices