What Sets Sustainable Leaders Apart? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Sets Sustainable Leaders Apart?

Sustainable LeadershipSustainability Officers

Article

September 20, 2022

4 min

Sustainable LeadershipSustainability Officers

Close

“At the beginning of the [sustainability] journey, if the CEO is not the engine of this, it cannot work. The CEO must be the ultimate force behind this. But then, as time goes on and the topic is established, the group that is involved and supporting it is just as important as the CEO.”

That’s the view of Francesco Starace, CEO and General Manager of Italian energy company Enel. Starace is one of 55 sustainable leaders we interviewed as part of a research collaboration with the United National Global Compact that looked at how corporate leaders can move the world towards the UN Sustainable Development Goals.

The pioneering leaders we studied are, without exception, at the top of their industries. Their experience and commercial and leadership acumen are substantial. But it’s their success beyond traditional business measures that provides valuable lessons. They’ve not simply advocated for sustainability—they’ve innovated and pushed real change within their organizations and beyond.

So, how have these sustainability pioneers managed to succeed where others haven’t? Our research found they combine a sustainable mindset with four capabilities—a combination that’s enabled them to drive transformation within and beyond their organization’s walls.

A sustainable mindset

Sustainable leaders recognize their companies don’t exist in a vacuum. They know there’s an intrinsic link between business, society, and the environment—and that long-term success relies on delivering across all three areas.

This mindset lets transformational leaders put sustainability on the right foundations for success while unlocking new value.

To nurture such a mindset, you should always ask how a decision will help move your organization towards its sustainability goals. Align all aspects of running your organization with the core belief in the link between business, society, and the environment.

“The leaders that are actively engaged in [sustainability], they are inspiring. You need to have a vision and conviction about the subject. If you are not convinced, lack authenticity, or try to please others for good publicity, it can’t work.”
Patrick Chalhoub, CEO, Chalhoub Group

Multi-level systems thinking

Sustainable leaders are naturally curious. They go beyond a deep understanding of their organization and consider how it interacts with the surrounding societal and environmental systems. Critically, they make sense of this complex landscape to turn sustainability into a competitive advantage.

By recognizing the interconnectivity of their business’s ecosystem, these leaders effectively manage risk and spot long-term growth opportunities to deliver sustainable and commercial results.

To achieve similar results, you need to be extremely ambitious and results orientated. Recognize no single company or industry can solve the systemic challenges the world faces today and drive collaboration with other businesses, civil society organizations, academia, and governments.

Stakeholder inclusion

Sustainable leaders don’t manage stakeholders, they include them. From employees to customers, governments to communities, they actively seek to understand various viewpoints to inform decisions. Only by understanding all stakeholders’ wants and needs can you drive impactful actions.

To do this, you need real empathy and authenticity. By bringing in the perspectives of diverse stakeholders who have different vantage points and experiences, you can much better understand the challenges, which will reduce risk and open opportunities for large-scale impact.

“I am 100% convinced that the companies that don’t take a full stakeholder approach—creating value for all stakeholders, not just shareholders—won’t be competitive and won’t exist.”

Mads Nipper, who was CEO at Grundfos when quotes. Now, CEO of Ørsted.

Long-term activation

Sustainable leaders don’t simply look to the long-term, they set audacious goals and rigorously pursue them. Such long-termism let them seize opportunities to drive innovation, develop their human capital, expand to new markets, grow their customer base, create operational efficiencies, and effectively manage social and environmental risks.

Doing this requires a great deal of courage to stay the course in the face of setbacks, or change tactics if something isn’t working, and make decisions that might be unpopular with some stakeholders. But if you pull it off, you’ll drive short-term value as well as enduring success.

“We are talking about and aiming for greatness over long periods of time. This requires a completely different mindset in leaders: people who can break down what works and improve on it further so that we can consistently and efficiently deliver on our commitment to making people’s lives better.”

David Ricks, Chair and CEO, Eli Lilly and Company

Disruptive innovation

Sustainable leaders dare to challenge traditional approaches and have a willingness to
disrupt their business and industry. They ask why they can’t do things differently. They cut through bureaucracy to inspire innovation that does away with the trade-off between profitability and sustainability.

Doing this effectively needs you to seek the best available science to move from today’s best practice toward tomorrow’s required practice. You’ll also need to feel comfortable without all the answers. Ultimately, you’ll need to confidently steer your organization into the unknown, steadied by the belief that it will unlock a better future for all.

CEOs must be, and foster, sustainable leaders

Recent global challenges, from the COVID-19 pandemic to the war in Ukraine, have highlighted the need to deliver on the UN Sustainable Development Goals. And that’s made it clear there’s an urgent need for a new type of business leader—one who makes the long-term sustainability and resilience of our world a top priority, leaving no one behind.

As a CEO, this means you’ll need to develop a sustainable mindset, embrace multi-level systems thinking, including all stakeholders, focus on long-term activation, and drive disruptive innovation. The question is, how will you develop these five traits in yourself and your leadership teams?

Sustainable LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

A Beacon in the Storm: C-suite Mentoring as a Leadership Imperative

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCulture RiskSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalVenture Capital and GrowthConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesFinTechGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementPrivate CreditInvestment ManagementReal EstateFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

From Risk Management to Risk Navigation: Why Strategic Risk Officers Have Never Been So Vital – Or So Challenged – in Financial Services

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices