Growth & Optimism for Consumer Packaged Goods: Key Themes from CAGNY 2023 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Growth & Optimism for Consumer Packaged Goods: Key Themes from CAGNY 2023

Industry TrendsConsumer

Article

Andrew Hayes

March 15, 2023

8 min

Industry TrendsConsumer

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

At CAGNY 2023, key themes around consumer centricity, innovation and disruption, ESG commitments, and people-first cultures emerged.

Close

Andrew Hayes

Houston
New York

The Consumer Analyst Group of New York (CAGNY) recently hosted its annual conference, at which leading executives of 29 of the top publicly traded consumer packaged goods (CPG) organizations reviewed company performance for 2022 and shared their outlooks and strategy for 2023.

While past years have been tumultuous, companies expect greater stability in the coming year. That said, headwinds remain — many highlighted friction in supply chains, inflationary pricing pressures, and continued geopolitical uncertainties. Despite these challenges, organizations were clear that brand investment levels will be maintained or even increased. The strong growth expectations suggest that organizations are not anticipating significant global shocks in 2023, and most companies approached their presentations with cautious optimism and a significant focus on topline growth. As L’Oréal indicated, topline growth allows companies to improve profitability and reinvest in in their brands and business. Companies seem committed to maintaining or increasing marketing and advertising spend, while also re-investing in their teams.

Russell Reynolds Associates highlighted key themes from CAGNY, including:

Continued attention on consumer centricity & value

Focus on innovation & disruption to drive topline growth

Practicing what you preach in ESG performance

Importance of people & culture

Continued attention on consumer centricity & value

Superiority is critical in an inflationary environment. As consumers face increased pressure on nearly every aspect of their household budgets, we are investing to deliver truly superior value – in combination of price, product performance and usage experience – to earn their loyalty every day.

Jon Moeller, Chairman, President and CEO, P&G

Consumer centricity has been at the forefront of CPG organizations over the last few years. While CPG organizations were working towards this prior to the pandemic, COVID-19 enhanced its importance and consumer centricity has quickly become a priority across all industries and verticals. Despite a return to normalcy, compared to prior years, consumer centricity remains a top priority as companies focus on maintaining and growing market share. With continued pressure on discretionary spend, the most successful companies passionately described how they are connecting with consumers and bringing their brands to consumers around the world, while backing up those claims with data.

Organizations also focused on providing value. Value encompasses brands’ efforts to provide a high performing product at the right price, while providing frictionless experiences in an effort to increase brand loyalty. Nestle indicated its plan to introduce value for consumers via new business models. For example, they are driving consumer loyalty via an app for their Purina pet care brand. The app is a one stop shop for consumers, providing a frictionless experience and expertise, while also increasing loyalty to the brand.  CPG organizations are also delivering value through the utilization of data and analytics. Companies  showcased how the use of data and analytics enables them to generate more insights while also meeting consumer needs.  Data mining allows companies to understand what’s going in the industry, the attributes that drive growth, and how best to incorporate them into their brands.

Consumer centricity was the driving force of many of the other themes we saw in this year’s CAGNY presentations, including a focus on innovation, increased marketing & advertising spend, and data driven approaches.

Focus on innovation & disruption to drive topline growth

Relentless innovation is essential to maintaining vibrant brands and is the lifeblood of a consumer products company. We think of innovation on a spectrum.

Jeff Harmening, Chairman and CEO, General Mills

Most companies underscored the role that innovation plays for their organizations and their future growth. Coca-Cola noted that innovation will be responsible for ~25% of its 2023 gross profit growth. There are many different ways that CPG organizations think about innovating within their organizations, including:

Close-in new products that provide consumers variety

White space exploration

Investing in new / emerging products and brands

Improving already established products and brands

Mergers & acquisitions

Supply chain

Digitization & data analytics

Testing new AI capabilities

CPG companies have always looked to product innovation to meet consumer demands, and this year was no exception. Product innovation encompasses both improving established product lines, as well as introducing entirely new products and brands. Product “premiumization” emerged as a common theme. Conagra, in particular, showcased innovation’s impact on its frozen foods profits via newly launched items and a massive rebranding and premiumization of existing brands via packaging, improved marketing, and price changes.

Practicing what you preach in ESG performance

We aim to create a more inclusive and sustainable world. This is not new to Diageo…We now set ambitious, industry leading targets as part of our society 2030 ESG action plan.

Ivan Menezes, CEO, Diageo

Sustainability is not a new agenda item for CPG companies. All of the companies that participated in CAGNY last year covered their ESG commitments, and ESG maintained a similar stage presence this year. Sustainability is acknowledged across the CPG industry as a key part of business strategy, with most companies discussing their commitments and forward looking plans regarding sustainability. However, we have yet to see a majority of CPG organizations share actual progress they have made towards the sustainability agenda, indicating there is still a long way to go.

Operating in a purpose-led, environmentally friendly way and providing sustainable products is something that CPG organizations have been working on for some time. McCormick cited efforts to lead the way in sustainable sourcing, with a goal for five of its iconic ingredients to be 100% sustainably sourced by 2025. While ESG has become a necessary issue to discuss, some companies also showcased tactical results; Diageo, for example, highlighted links between revenues and ESG efforts.

We have also seen the evolving definition of ESG reflected in company behaviors. Sustainability, which was once primarily defined as operating in an eco-friendly manner, has come to mean so much more. It goes beyond the environmental impact to also encompass the social and economic impact that an organization has across its value chain.  For example, Mondelez discussed the four different pillars of its sustainability approach, which included a focus on sustainable sourcing of ingredients, human rights, reduction of CO2 emissions, and reducing packaging waste.

Importance of people & culture

We care deeply about our employees and invest in their growth, success & wellbeing. Our ambition is to be the most impactful, energized and inclusive culture in food.

Sean Connolly, President and CEO, Conagra

The importance of people and culture was emphasized across many of the presentations. More so than previous years, people and culture were featured heavily in CPG’s strategic priorities. JM Smucker indicated two of its five strategic priorities were centered on this theme: “Nurturing and investing in our culture” and “Improving diversity and fostering inclusion and equity.” Sysco included “Customer teams” as part of its strategy, indicating that their greatest strength lies in their talent. Imperial Brands discussed a focus on building a performance-based culture and an immersive program at the heart of its culture change agenda involving all 26,000 of their colleagues.

There has been a major shift in the work paradigm. From ‘The Great Resignation’ to ‘Quiet Quitting’, tight labor markets and the pandemic-driven hiring booms gave substantive power to employees. Organizations have taken note. Retention plans are being reworked, with companies keeping talent motivated and happy through a healthy and ethical workplace culture. There was also talk of workforce rebalancing, with companies looking to simplify their structures, particularly across geographies, and leveraging these efficiently to provide opportunities to elevate top talent. PepsiCo, for example, reorganized with more empowered local structures, delayered to enable connectivity, speed-to-market and elevated diversity. PepsiCo also discussed seven different ways it helps evolve and foster a positive culture:

Raise the bar on talent & diversity

Voice opinions fearlessly

Focus & get things done fast

Act as owners

Celebrate success

Act with integrity

Be consumer centric

With a focus on people & culture, priorities have shifted in the last 12 months from recruiting and finding talent in a tight labor market to now developing, harnessing and retaining talent.

Reflections on CAGNY 2023

We feel strongly about our growth opportunities and how we're building a more capable company, how we're building our talent, how we're building a long-term sustainability around our brands and our business.

Ramon Laguarta, Chairman and CEO, PepsiCo

While pandemic-induced disruptions have not been fully resolved, the tone at the event was optimistic and did not anticipate a major economic recession or a material decrease in global consumer spending. That said, organizations are still forming contingency plans and the following questions remain:

Given ambitious growth projections, how resilient are companies to future shocks?

How far will companies take their renewed innovation mantras? With new technologies such as the metaverse, ChatGPT and generative AI, and others tools being adopted in some capacity, will companies leverage these to achieve true digital transformation, or just as productivity enablers?

Given the significant ESG commitments made during the pandemic, how will companies improve transparency and accountability for commitment horizons that once seemed distant but are now fast approaching?

Many companies have suggested a renewed focus on culture, but how will they ensure their top teams are effectively aligned and that leadership across categories and geographies are driving towards shared goals, given M&A and delayering activity?

Companies have acknowledged that talent is the secret to success, but how will they ensure they are attracting and retaining the best talent?

Authors

Andrew Hayes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ CPG practice. He is jointly based in New York and Houston.

Kyle Monk leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Knowledge team. He is based in London.

Sotiria Pericli is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices