What to Know About the SEC’s Interest in Human Capital Management Disclosure | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What to Know About the SEC’s Interest in Human Capital Management Disclosure

Article

July 13, 2022

6 min

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The SEC is expected to introduce new reporting requirements, including key workforce-related metrics, in the coming months.

Close

By Margot Brandenburg, Ford Foundation & Satyam Khanna, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.

Investors, academics, and other stakeholders are increasingly focused on improving corporate disclosure of human capital management issues.

The most innovative American companies often state that their workforce is their greatest source of value. That is reflected in broader market trends, where human capital is increasingly driving corporate value. In 1975, for instance, the market value of intangible assets including human capital accounted for 17% of the S&P500’s value, according to merchant bank Ocean Tomo. By 2020, they represented 90%.

However, SEC rules have not kept up with this reality; the agency’s disclosure regime has traditionally recognized human capital as a cost. In practice, that means investors are unable to distinguish between companies who invest in improving their workforces and those who do not. “Because human capital is included in administrative expenses, not as a stand-alone item, it is plausible that capital markets punish companies that invest in their workers as if those companies had excessive energy bills,” observedSen. Mark Warner in 2018.

In recent years, investors have asked the SEC to update its rules to add reporting of core human capital management-related items. In 2017, the Human Capital Management Coalition – which includes 36 institutional investors representing over $8 trillion in assets – petitioned the agency to require disclosure of a set of qualitative and quantitative workforce disclosures. And, in 2020, the SEC’s Investor Advisory Committee recommended the SEC study and propose rules enhancing transparency around human capital.

The SEC, under former Chair Jay Clayton, responded by updating its rules in 2020 to includeprinciples-based disclosure requirements, with companies reporting their human capital resources if material. A new study by academics Ethan Rouen, Thomas Bourveau, Maliha Chowdhury, and Anthony Le finds that quantitative disclosures have increased overall since the rule’s enactment but that there is still substantial variation in the quality of disclosures.

Investor and stakeholder interest in these issues remains high. According to Glass Lewis, in 2021, human capital-related shareholder proposals received on average 45% support – up from 28% in 2020. In his annual letter in 2022, BlackRock CEO Larry Fink remarked, “CEOs need to be asking themselves whether they are creating an environment that helps them compete for talent,” pointing to changes in the employer-employee relationship from the Covid-19 pandemic. And last month, a coalition of 50 non-profits and foundations, including the Ford Foundation, sent a letter to the SEC requesting it prioritize a human capital disclosure rulemaking, stating, “Information on human capital management – such as a company’s workforce composition, compensation, health and safety, and diversity practices – is vital to investor decision making.”

SEC Chair Gensler has indicated the agency would build atop its prior work by adding rules for disclosure of certain metrics. Last year he indicated these might include “workforce turnover, skills and development training, compensation, benefits, workforce demographics including diversity, and health and safety.” Specific rules on the subject are expected in the coming months.

Human capital disclosure’s up-front costs are expected to be relatively cheap for companies, since companies already track or report much relevant data. A recent petition from accounting scholars Colleen Honigsberg and Shivaram Rajgopal – along with former SEC commissioners Robert Jackson and Joe Grundfest – called for the SEC to enhance disclosure of workforce spending, which would build off of existing tax reporting. Other indicators like diversity data are already reported to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.

Standardized human capital measures may even save companies money, as they will help streamline the information requested by investors, data providers, and other stakeholders. The International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) and Business at the OECD (BIAC) surveyed over 250 regulatory and compliance leaders from global financial institutions in 2018 and estimated that “a piecemeal approach to financial sector regulation costs the global economy $780 billion USD a year.”

Regardless of how the SEC proceeds, U.S. companies who engage in business abroad will need to think more about these issues. The newly formed International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB), which absorbed SASB standards, and the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) in Europe will also be providing new disclosure directives. CSRD and other European regulations will be mandatory and apply to American and other foreign companies doing business in Europe.

Disclosure rules can facilitate the comparison of human capital measures across peer groups and the broader market, enhancing market efficiency. Companies can prepare by taking steps now to better understand their own sources of workforce information – including, for example, those relating to compensation, training, demographics and turnover. And we encourage companies and other stakeholders to engage with the SEC to help them better understand how companies are managing their most important source of strength: their people.

Authors

Margot Brandenburg is Senior Program Officer for Mission Investments at the Ford Foundation.

Satyam Khanna is a former ESG advisor at the Securities & Exchange Commission and the SIEPR Policy Fellow at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices