The New Nuclear Leader: Leadership Implications for a Sector in Transformation | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The New Nuclear Leader: Leadership Implications for a Sector in Transformation

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesGrowth and ScalingEnergy and Natural ResourcesIndustrial GoodsExecutive Search

Article

February 24, 2026

9 min

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesGrowth and ScalingEnergy and Natural ResourcesIndustrial GoodsExecutive Search

Executive Summary

How nuclear project developers and reactor manufacturers must look beyond their industry to find future-ready leaders.

Close

Abigail Skerrett

London

Stephen Schoenberger

Boston

The nuclear power industry in the United States, Canada and Western Europe is entering a pivotal new phase. After decades of slow growth and limited interest from investors and policymakers, nuclear energy is once again being viewed as a critical component of future energy systems.

On both sides of the Atlantic, ambitious government plans for a large and accelerated expansion of the operating nuclear power capacity reflect this renewed interest. But it’s not just favorable policy that’s driving the nuclear sector’s resurgence; private sector players in technology and finance are also playing a key role.

Hyperscalers are increasingly underpinning nuclear investment as long-term power customers, thus fundamentally reshaping the nuclear power sector’s commercial logic. Meanwhile, private capital investors are showing interest in investing in nuclear energy at scale, often in partnership with governments and under new risk-sharing mechanisms.

Amid these major industry transformations, having the right leadership team has never been more important for companies across the nuclear power ecosystem. Yet many of these companies – be they project developers, legacy nuclear reactor manufacturers using conventional technologies, or start-ups focused on developing small modular reactors (SMR) – feel that they don’t have the right leaders or are struggling to find the talent they need to seize this moment.

Pulling insights from a series of recent interviews with chairs, board directors and senior executives across the nuclear power sector, as well as on years of experience advising nuclear industry leaders and policymakers, we offer RRA’s expert perspective on how these companies should rethink their leadership teams in a changing industry, and how they can find the executives that will empower their success.

A new kind of leader: From steady-state manager to innovative systems-thinker

The nuclear power sector is transitioning from a steady-state industry – which saw limited developments over several decades – to one undergoing rapid transformation. Underpinning this change is the confluence of surging electricity demand (driven by data centers for AI, but also other industrial and consumer factors), rising energy security concerns, and continued decarbonization commitments.

Policymakers, technology companies, and investors are all betting on nuclear energy being able to deliver a significant share of the world’s electricity over the coming decades. In the United States, hyperscalers – who are driven by the need for reliable power supply 24/7 – are increasingly acting as anchor customers for nuclear energy, offering utilities and reactor manufacturers long-term offtake agreements, direct project partnerships, and support for advanced reactor development. In Europe, meanwhile, countries facing a rising share of intermittent renewables in their power mix regard nuclear as a way to increase their energy security.

These dynamics are placing project developers and nuclear reactor manufacturers at the center of a larger and more sophisticated web of relationships. Companies must not only engage with utilities, regulators and their supply chain, but also global technology firms, private-sector investors, and policymakers. This means new technologies, new customers, and heightened pressure to deliver on time and on budget.

Nuclear Power´s New Stakeholder Map

Source: RRA research and analysis

However, many companies in the nuclear power ecosystem remain led by teams shaped for a different time, which was defined by a culture of risk aversion and long decision cycles. These organizations need new talent and perspectives to be successful amid new opportunities and challenges.

While nuclear technical expertise, regulatory compliance, and operational safety remain paramount, our interviews and market knowledge suggest a growing recognition that the leadership teams of project developers and reactor manufacturers must include executives who bring greater emphasis on an additional range of skills. These include:

The capacity to build projects faster, more efficiently, and with stronger cost control;

Greater sensitivity for the political dynamics underpinning nuclear power;

Managing new stakeholders from the technology and private capital sectors, in addition to utilities, suppliers and regulators;

The ability to manage and inspire complex teams and communicate effectively across different sectors.

Winning in today’s context is not merely about building reactors. It’s about scaling organizations, supply chains, and stakeholder relationships, while taking teams into uncharted operational territories (such as the accelerated development of large-scale reactors, or the commercialization of first-of-a-kind SMR technologies). Today’s customers and stakeholders will need new solutions, increased pace, and more innovative thinking from nuclear executives.

Where can companies find this new type of leader? Below we provide our perspective, informed by our professional experience and conversations with industry insiders.

Think outside the box: Look for leaders beyond the nuclear power industry

We believe that nuclear project developers and reactor manufacturers should expand their search for talent beyond their sector and into adjacent industries – which we list in the table below.

The move to adjacent talent pools is particularly important for leaders in the operations and commercial functional areas:

Functional area: Operations

What nuclear companies should look for:

Leaders with sophisticated project management and system thinking skills, not just technical competency and regulatory compliance. Compared to traditional nuclear power executives, they must balance safety and agility to deliver faster operations, greater scale, more complex supply chains, and sustained cost reductions. They should focus on highly regulated industries, and refuse to compromise on safety.

Industries where they should look:

Aerospace and Defense: Leaders in these industries know how to deal with highly technical products, long product development life cycles, government customers, and integrating innovation into manufacturing processes. Safety remains deeply critical.

Engineered Materials: Certain engineered materials processes are very applicable to nuclear fuel manufacturing: very strong end-to-end manufacturing leaders, strong process and safety orientation, strong global approach to supply chain, large capital projects and integration.

Semiconductors: Leaders in this space are familiar with large capital deployment and very precise manufacturing. On the downside, this talent pool is concentrated in Asia (although that is changing) and highly compensated.

Pharmaceuticals: These leaders bring a high focus on quality and innovation, strong supply chain integration, and thorough regulatory understanding. They are also highly compensated.

Functional area: Commercial

What nuclear companies should look for:

Leaders with understanding of the nuclear industry and keen selling skills, but also relationship management experience with the new actors now operating in the industry. They must be capable of simultaneously engaging and creating relationships with stakeholders across utilities and regulators (as nuclear companies are already used to), but also hyperscalers and other data centers businesses, large industrial off-takers and private capital investors.

Industries where they should look:

Utilities: Several executives with strong utility backgrounds have made the switch successfully; they understand the space but bring a customer perspective.

EPC: These leaders understand how to work with stakeholders on building complex projects and long-term agreements.

Oil & Gas: Executives bring experience with long-term project development, off-take agreements, and political connectivity, while moving quickly.

Telecommunications and Technology: These leaders are familiar with large-scale infrastructure, understand long-term negotiations and commercial cycles, and bring strong government connectivity.

Hiring talent from outside the nuclear industry can provide the new skills that companies in the nuclear power ecosystem need to accelerate their pace of growth and engage with more dynamic customers than they are used to. In this context, assessing an incoming executive for both their ability to meet immediate challenges and for their future potential to excel as a leader can be an invaluable tool at organizations’ disposal to dispel uncertainty and build confidence in a new hire.

But a shift in attitude towards external hires is not the only change that nuclear power organizations will need to make to bring fresh thinking and different capabilities to their leadership teams.

Update compensation structures to attract talent from outside the industry

We have already started to see top executives from adjacent industries express interest in moving to the nuclear power sector, which is beginning to be perceived as a new and exciting area of growth.

To seize this opportunity, C-suite and boards who want to secure the best talent from outside the nuclear industry will need to adopt compensation structures that may depart from historic sector norms. This is because the base compensation of nuclear project developers and legacy reactor manufacturers tends to lag behind the industries where top operations and commercial talent are typically found.

In addition, many of the adjacent industries mentioned above have higher equity and long-term incentives than what is offered in the nuclear power sector. As they increasingly compete for talent with SMR manufacturers, technology companies and private sector investors, nuclear power companies will need to improve their long-term incentives to attract, motivate, and retain top talent over the next 10 years.

Anchor leadership in national political and regulatory ecosystems

Nuclear power remains uniquely intertwined with national policy, regulation, and public trust. As a result, established and emerging reactor manufacturers, and project developers, must be deliberate about in-country political and regulatory connectivity when appointing leaders to senior, externally facing roles, including public affairs, go-to-market, and operations.

This dynamic does not mean that companies should refrain from hiring internationally or from adjacent sectors. But it does require careful calibration to ensure that leadership teams collectively possess deep national insight, institutional relationships, and the ability to navigate shifting political dynamics.

The right passport and language skills are becoming increasingly important to negotiate long-term nuclear deals and successfully build new projects. This must be considered when hiring top talent.

What’s next for nuclear? People leadership as strategic differentiator

As nuclear power companies navigate accelerated growth and heightened scrutiny, one insight from our interviews rings clearer than the rest: while technical excellence and regulatory discipline remain essential, they are no longer sufficient on their own. The leaders who will make the greatest difference in this new phase of the nuclear industry are those who can lead people with speed through complexity and change in an industry on the upswing.

Developing and scaling nuclear projects today requires integrating specialists from different sectors and professional backgrounds – from infrastructure to technology and finance. Bringing these capabilities together into a high-performing organization demands leaders who can inspire trust, create alignment across disparate stakeholders, and motivate teams under sustained pressure.

Safety, quality, and cost-effectiveness will remain non-negotiable elements of any nuclear project but, in this context, excellent people leadership skills become a strategic differentiator. For companies to thrive in the new nuclear power industry, their leaders will need to sharpen their emotional intelligence.

Whether this moment translates into a “nuclear renaissance” is, ultimately, a leadership test. RRA is here to support our partners in acing this test. We know that successful nuclear leaders will need to be faster than their predecessors, politically savvy, manage diverse stakeholders, and able to motivate teams through complex growth.

Authors

Abigail Skerrettco-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial Services & Infrastructure practice. She is based in London.
Stephen Schoenberger leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Energy Transition practice. He is based in Boston.
Francesco Menonna is a member of the Russell Reynolds Associates’ Commercial Strategy & Insights team. He is based in New York.

The New Nuclear Leader: Leadership Implications for a Sector in Transformation

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices