Building a Future-Fit Leadership Team | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Suite Spot: A CEO’s Story of Building a Future-Fit Executive Team

This is a story of C-suite success—the strategic process of building a high-caliber leadership team and securing long-term business performance—from the point of view of a CEO.

Connect with our consultants

Names and details have been fictionalized to protect the identities of real people.

Throughout, we’ve included helpful boxes to provide additional information and clarification on subjects mentioned within the author’s retelling.

Read the full story below or download the PDF version.

Contents

1. How it all began

2. Getting the team together

3. The scope of the work

4. The results

How it all began

In the early days of the global pandemic, the world was in flux, and so was our business. We were getting ready to spin off from our parent company and were just months away from closing the deal. It was a hugely exciting time. But also, an uncertain one.

We had a new strategy, an investment thesis to deliver against—and a new CEO. I’d been picked to head up the new spin-off company and my remit was clear: to help this fledgling company thrive in one of the most uncertain operating environments our industry had seen.

With so many unknowns, I wanted to make sure that we were putting our best foot forward. If we were to deliver, the whole company would need to align around our new vision and pull together from the get-go.

I knew that the performance of the executive team was key. They would be the ones helping me steer the company into its new future, setting the right tone at the top, and helping our new cultural identity take shape. I wanted to make sure that they all had what it would take to handle this immense transition and power us forward.

It’s not that there was a particular problem that was worrying me. I respected and trusted the leadership team I had inherited. But it was also true that we were now in completely new territory. The pressure was on to deliver. And to deliver as a team.

Connect with our experts

Getting the team together

The board, CHRO, and I agreed that getting an outside partner was the best way to get an objective sense of our leadership strengths—as well as to identify any opportunities to improve.

I had a go-to firm in mind, but a trusted advisor threw RRA’s name in the hat as they had been impressed with the leadership assessment and development work RRA had previously done for them.

Working with various leadership advisors over the years, you get familiar with the people and the processes. But when it came to the pitch meetings, RRA rose to the top.

I was impressed with the breadth of advice they could bring. They could take a forensic look at everything from whether individual CxOs had the right skills, to how the executive team gelled together, as well as our cultural fingerprint and succession planning strategies.

In other words, they could give us the full picture of what was working and what was not, and then deliver a roadmap to where we needed to be. It was the total end-to-end partnership that got me hooked.

Choosing the right partner.

There are several leadership advisory firms to pick from—each with its strengths and weaknesses. Here are a few tips for when you’re assessing partners:

1. Choose someone straight-talking and honest
There’s nothing less useful than an advisor who is afraid of giving you honest feedback—especially when you’re dealing with something as high-stakes as picking the leadership team of your company.

When picking a leadership advisory firm to partner with, go for the one that’s not afraid of telling you the truth about things—even (or especially) when the truth is a hard pill to swallow.

2. Choose someone familiar with the company and its needs—or comparable companies and situations
A good advisory partner will have some knowledge about the intimate workings of your company and its unique needs. This is easier when you already have an established relationship but is still relevant when considering a new partner. A team that takes the effort to understand the nuances of your organization and its history and culture will be a better partner to you than one that doesn’t.

And, while no two companies are the same, there are common threads. Advisory partners who have expertise in related industries or companies will be better able to serve you and your company’s needs.

3. Pick a firm with a good reputation that key stakeholders know
Getting stakeholder buy-in is imperative for a process as drawn out and intensive as succession planning. That job is easier when stakeholders are familiar with the advisory partner’s brand and reputation.

Connect with our experts

The scope of the work

To kick off the project, RRA spent a month meeting key stakeholders to get to know more about our strategy, structure, and the leaders we needed, now and in the future.

That was the foundation for an 18-month project that spanned three core phases:

Fortifying today’s leadership team

Building robust future-fit succession strategies

Invigorating our organizational culture

Fortifying today’s leadership team

RRA’s first deliverable was to work with myself and the CHRO to develop a leader profile that set out the specific skills, personality traits, and experiences that each CxO needed to perform well today.

Then, by charting our plans for the company, we also worked out the leadership development needs of each CxO if they were to help the company hit its long-term strategic goals.

It’s always hard to predict the future. But through their work with other organizations in my industry, RRA helped us understand what skills were in demand, as well as the personality traits of leaders at like-minded organizations.

Once we agreed on the leader profiles, the next step was to understand how well our C-suite executives aligned with them. Each functional leader underwent a rigorous assessment that involved workshops, in-depth 1:1s with psychologists and market advisors, and 360-degree referencing.

It was a fascinating exercise. Throughout the process, RRA brought science to the art of leadership performance, giving us solid insight into the difference between a good executive and a great one, and the confidence to understand how well our C-suite was positioned for success.

How to determine what traits to include in your leader profile

Every company should create a bespoke leader profile. No two companies are the same, and while many elements will be similar, there will be differences. A CxO that would work for one company may not at another.

Some skill requirements will be very situation-dependent. For example, if the company is going through a challenging financial period—or an M&A, or a shift in strategy and direction—its leader profile will need to reflect that. In those cases, you’ll probably want a candidate with proven experience in handling the challenge.

But there are several universal traits you’ll want those in your leadership team to have:

Empathy and openness

An ability to communicate effectively

An ability to inspire and invigorate others

Excellent stakeholder management skills

An ability to collaborate and work well with others

An ability to make difficult decisions—and carry them through

Honest commitment to values

Most importantly, they must be someone your people will respect and trust.

Connect with our experts

Building robust future-fit succession strategies

Spinning off from the parent company meant we were starting from scratch when it came to building a pipeline of next-generation C-suite leaders. We needed clear succession plans.

RRA helped us focus on building talent benches for our C-suite leaders as well as other key value-driving roles. Following an executive assessments process, we now have clear succession heatmaps, individual leadership development plans, and a talent strategy that aims to address priority leadership gaps across the enterprise.

Invigorating our organizational culture

We wanted to get an accurate picture of our culture—what was working and what was not. We had tried engagement surveys before but knew that they don’t always paint a clear picture of what’s really going on. RRA promised us a different approach. They have a culture imaging diagnostic that they said lifted the lid on what our people really thought, rather than what they thought management wanted to hear.

The output of this work was a “cultural MRI” which gave us a precise understanding of our organization-wide beliefs and behaviors. We could see what would help us achieve our vision, and what would hold us back if we didn’t address it.

Connect with our experts

The results

At the end of the 18-month process, I knew how right RRA had been when they told us at the start that this would be a long-term strategic process that would, at times, challenge us and confront us to think differently.

The executive assessments were the best I’ve seen, and RRA presented the findings sensitively. It’s never easy telling people about areas they need to develop and work on, but they handled the process of providing feedback in the debriefing sessions with tact. And everyone remained engaged in the process and motivated to begin their leadership development journeys.

When it came to our culture, we found that our executive leadership team needed to do more to clarify the company’s future and help everyone align around our purpose. This included fostering a culture of innovation and agility, and helping our people understand how we would be driving competitive differentiation.

There is no better feeling as a CEO than knowing the strengths and limits of your executive team and culture. It’s given me the confidence I needed that we were set up to put our best foot forward and deliver on our strategic vision.

WE WOULD LOVE TO PARTNER WITH YOU

Start developing your C-suite to deliver even greater success
with our experts

Resource Hub

Enabling C-Suite Success

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

C-suite Performance: Are You Thinking About Your Top Team in the Right Way?

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

The Science Behind C-suite Success: Your CxOs Need This Skill

Enabling C-Suite Success

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

C-suite Performance: Are You Thinking About Your Top Team in the Right Way?

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

The Science Behind C-suite Success: Your CxOs Need This Skill

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices