Looking to Become a Tech-First Business? The 4 Myths Holding You Back | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Looking to Become a Tech-First Business? The 4 Myths Holding You Back

Technology and InnovationLeadershipTransformation and InnovationTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Article

+ 1 author

September 01, 2022

8 min

Technology and InnovationLeadershipTransformation and InnovationTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Executive Summary

Many leaders are grappling with how to pivot their businesses towards a more tech and data-fueled future. We set out the four myths that hold many back.

Close

Tristan Jervis

London

Justin Cerilli

Stamford

Agnes Greaves

London

Norm Yustin

Chicago

More on capturing the TechVantage

For years, leaders have been promised amazing results from “tech transformation.” But the hard truth is that most efforts to infuse technology across operations fail—often spectacularly. A 2020 study by Boston Consulting Group found that around 70% of tech transformations do not deliver on their goals. That means that of the $1.3 trillion poured into “tech transformations” globally over recent years, around $998 billion went to waste.

We think it is time to start a new conversation around technology. Conventional wisdom has done little to move the dial. If anything, it has set organizations back from where they need to be.

Here, we set out the four myths that are stopping many leaders from gaining advantage from technology—and how they can finally accelerate progress to make tech stick.

Myth 1: It’s all about finding the right tech solution to hit your goals

It is easy to get dazzled by the next big thing in tech, be it cloud, AI, the Internet of Things, or another breakthrough, and believe that it offers the keys to business success. But technology solutions alone do not create a competitive advantage. Unlocking the value of technology is first and foremost a human effort.

You could have all the latest tech, platforms, and software, but without visionary and bold leaders throughout your organization, you are unlikely to reap the rewards you’re seeking. Becoming a tech-enabled business is, at its core, a huge change-management exercise. And that requires leaders who can bring the entire organization on the journey, winning over both hearts and minds along the way.

This starts at the top. With you, the CEO. You are the bridge between where your company is today and where it needs to be. That involves setting a compelling vision that will ultimately redefine who you are as a business and your place in the world. It is about crafting a story that everyone can get behind and wants to play a role in delivering. It is about understanding the obstacles in your way, and removing them piece by piece, so the entire organization can push forward.

Of course, there will be difficult, and sometimes uncomfortable, decisions along the way. For example, to increase agility, results, and speed, you may need to commit to flattening your organizational hierarchy. That may feel awkward for those used to leading in a more command-and-control environment. But doing so will allow you to build the culture of collaboration and innovation you’ll need to unlock the exponential value of technology.

The best CEOs sow tech into every leadership decision they make. So, when your organization is looking for its next C-suite leader or crafting its succession strategy, make sure you hard-bake tech acumen into your plans. It will be the single-biggest driver of whether your efforts to transform your business will succeed in the long run.

Myth 2: The tech function should lead your transformation

In most organizations today, responsibility for technology sits with a single vertical: the technology function, headed by a CDO, CTO, CIO, or similar. While every organization needs an empowered team of digital experts, finding true advantage through technology requires leaders to break down siloes and build a firm-wide culture that prizes innovation and tech adoption.

To get there, technology needs to become an enterprise-wide responsibility, a mantle that all leaders take on, not just tech leaders. When this happens, everyone on the C-suite—from the CHRO and CMO to the CFO and COO—aligns around the same vision for change and works in lockstep to deliver it across their teams, sending the cultural signal to the entire organization that tech is not only a strategic priority but something that everyone needs to get behind.

Not everyone in your C-suite will possess the right skills to do this today. That’s where development comes in. Tech-first leaders aren’t just born. They are also made. And with the right training and coaching, it’s entirely possible for any C-suite leader to up their tech game.

It’s also important to identify future leaders within your organization—those one, two, or three levels below the C-suite—who will power your transformation efforts forward, long after your tenure as CEO is over. Find the people who understand how to harness technology’s potential to drive growth, invest in them, and build them into the succession strategy for every CxO role. By the time they reach the C-suite, they’ll have exactly what it takes to ride the latest wave of innovation, and the next, and the next.

Myth 3: Your next CDO needs to come from Google [or insert preferred Silicon Valley tech company here]

While CEOs set the vision, and the organizational culture provides the ecosystem for change to happen (and stick), every company still needs a supercharged digital function, which navigates the day-to-day journey to becoming a tech-enabled firm. The question is, how do you best set up this team for success?

One of the biggest mistakes we see is when CEOs are looking to hire the C-suite executive to head up their digital team. Typically, they want to start with candidates from Big Tech. The logic is that executives from players like Google, Apple, Netflix, or Uber will have what it takes to accelerate innovation. It is, after all, what they do each day. While this is true, there are some important caveats.

Transplanting a Big Tech executive into a legacy organization that has not yet adopted technology at anywhere near the same pace and scale carries a high risk of “tissue rejection”.

Big Tech is typically populated by digital natives. That means executives from these companies may never have debated with internal stakeholders why the business should be digitally oriented; it is already in their company’s DNA. They may never have experienced pushing through large-scale transformations, nor had to persuade stakeholders that it was the right thing to do. Blowback is often a new and confusing experience for them.

Ultimately, the ability to influence is as crucial as technical skills. Any executive you hire will need to be able to fight internal criticism, inertia and skepticism. They will need to successfully engage and inspire their peers, employees, board, and wider executive teams. Not everyone is capable of this, so look for leaders with proven track records of doing so.

So, while Big Tech executives are an important part of your candidate pool, try to avoid starting your search there by default. Find leaders who can communicate the urgency and opportunity of digital to gain consensus and engage everyone in your change journey.

Myth 4: “Tech transformation” has an end goal

For more than a decade, companies have been relentlessly advised to embrace “tech transformation.” To push ahead with multi-billion dollar projects with the promise that their business will metamorphosize into a Tech Company, regardless of whether it was selling services, widgets, or donuts.

But the actual idea of “tech transformation” is problematic for two reasons. First, it sends the signal that infusing technology across your organization is a one-off exercise—a once-in-a-generation investment that will secure your competitive legacy for years to come. Second, it suggests there’s an end goal to reach. With innovation cycles happening faster than ever, this is a long way from the truth.

Finding advantage through technology is not a destination, but a continuous evolution. A never-ending process. Understanding this allows your team to shift the conversation. Discussions become more long-term and strategic. And it avoids the need to begin the journey with a huge upfront capital investment in a tech solution that many are nervous to back.

One of the best pieces of advice we have for any company looking to become more tech-enabled is to not strive for total transformation in a single slingshot.

Instead, understand where you are on the tech maturity curve—how you measure up against your industry competitors and best-in-class Tech Companies—and then embark on a journey of continuous improvement to push you closer to where you want to be.

In 60 Seconds

Know that this starts with you. As the CEO, the buck always stops with you. And responsibility for tech transformation is no different. The strategic importance of gaining advantage from technology is not something that can be abdicated to others.

Understand where you are on the digital maturity curve. How do you measure up against not only your industry competitors but best-in-class Tech Companies? And then embark on a journey of continuous improvement to push you closer to where you want, or need, to be.

Look for tech acumen when hiring any C-suite leader—and revamp your CxO succession plans to ensure you have a strong pipeline of future executives who have a hunger for what’s next (and know how to get there).

Work on creating an agile culture that prizes innovation. This won’t happen overnight. But start by making technology everyone’s responsibility, not just something that’s relegated to the technology function alone.

Expand your thinking about what makes a great tech leader. It might not be someone from one of the tech giants. Executives who’ve already transformed a legacy organization will often index higher on the skills you need to do the same.

It's time for a new conversation about technology

Learn more

WE WOULD LOVE TO PARTNER WITH YOU

Start building the leadership to unlock exponential value from technology

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices