Building Digital Readiness in Social Impact Organizations | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Building Digital Readiness in Social Impact Organizations

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipEducationSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Article

Tory Clark

October 24, 2022

6 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipEducationSocial ImpactBoard and CEO AdvisoryTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Executive summary

Technology presents immense opportunities to social impact institutions, and leaders will need to upskill their organizations at all levels to embrace it.

Close

Tory Clark

Atlanta
Washington DC

Digital technologies can help generate greater impact, but are leaders ready to embrace them?

Technology has disrupted ways of working in every industry, particularly since the COVID-19 pandemic hit in 2020. For most of the nonprofit and wider social impact sector, this meant an even sharper shift to the use of tech tools than in other industries, both as a result of being at the frontline of the COVID response, and having previously lagged behind other sectors in adopting digital innovation.

Now, as funding from governments and other sources becomes scarce, there will be an increased focus on compelling data and analytics capabilities as a crucial differentiator. Many of the fast-tracked digital technologies implemented by the sector in the last two years are here to stay: trends such as mobile giving from donors, learning management systems for education purposes, and digital measurement and evaluation, are cost-efficient and provide a high level of accountability that benefits the sector.i

In RRA's annual 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, which surveys over 1,500 leaders globally on threats to organizational health and leadership, technology underpinned three of the top five external threats most likely to affect organizational health in the next 12-18 months.

What external factors will most affect business health over the next 12-18 months?

(% of executives selecting in top 5)

RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, Base n = 1,590 global executives

Looking at social impact respondents alone, technological change did not feature as a challenge even in the top ten organizational threats.

What external factors will most affect organizational health over the next 12 to 18 months?

% of social impact executives selecting item as top 5 issue from list of 20

RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, Base n = 63 social impact executives

These findings from the survey of social impact executives contrast interestingly with other surveys of the broader workforce in the sector.

A recent Salesforce.org survey of 1,250 global nonprofit employees found that 79% of respondents expect to leverage artificial intelligence in the next three years. At the same time, three out of the five major perceived challenges for the sector were tech-related, while there are clear technology components to the other two:ii

Can leaders overcome these tech challenges by embracing innovation to maximize their organizations’ impact? Our Monitor looked into various aspects of social impact digital readiness, including leadership perceptions, talent implications, and cultural mindset.

Barriers to bridging tech disruption and action

Technology will likely disrupt critical aspects of the social impact sector. There are opportunities to be harnessed, in terms of programmatic performance, donor engagement, and impact assessment. There are evident risks as well, not least for organizations that fall behind the standards set elsewhere in the sector.

Our Monitor found that just one in ten leaders at social impact organizations consider their organizations to be “tech-first” institutions. As described in a recent RRA article, a tech-first culture exist in organizations where technology is not the exclusive domain of the chief digital officer, chief technology officer or chief information officer - instead, every leader is a technology champion; and where failed innovations are not viewed as failures, but data points that help define the journey to success.iii

A tech-first outlook cannot be achieved without the talent to foster it. Our research finds that just 22% of social impact chief executives believe they have the right talent to drive their digital journey. This is both a consideration of their technology function leaders, but also of how their organization’s wider leadership use technology as a strategic enabler of their mission. Just two in five chief executives responding to the Monitor believe that their executive teams have a strong understanding of digital technologies, and how their organization must transform.

Source: RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, base n = 40 social impact executives

Supporting effective tech-enabled, resilient organizations requires leadership to establish a culture that supports innovation. Around half of our respondents said their leaders were not afraid to disrupt the status quo, and were motivated to take tech risks. However, less than a quarter believed that their organization could engage constructively with failure of digital innovation. This suggests that while leaders might be willing to embrace digital transformation, organizations overall do not feel that failures can be absorbed.

Source: RRA 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, base n = 40 social impact executives

Solutions for embracing the digital transformation

As in every other sector, technology presents immense opportunities to social impact institutions, whilst also creating new organizational challenges. Social impact executives will need to upskill their organizations at all levels, which might include hiring new leaders, developing existing ones, and fostering a pro-innovation culture.

So what can leaders do to gain advantage through technology?

Understand where you are in the digital maturity curve

Appraise the existing strengths of the technology portfolio, its functional leadership, and its connectivity to the organization’s mission. Evaluate where risks need to be mitigated. Are transformation programs aligned to the strategic direction of the organization overall? How well does the technology function understand the mission of the organization? Is IT functional, a strategic enabler, or a key driver of the organization’s success? Is the board aware of the implications of digital disruption?

Find and develop leaders who understand how technology drives growth

To unlock the real value of technology, you need board and C-suite leaders who can manage immense changes while inspiring others towards an ambitious tech vision. While the war for talent might be hard to win, particularly in a sector where salaries are less competitive, tech candidates might be attracted to other organizational features, such as organizational mission and purpose, owning a service line, C-suite titles and proximity to the CEO. Elevating tech roles will prove attractive in competitive markets.

Embed technology acumen within leadership performance

When growth hinges on technology, you need impartial ways to assess every leader’s tech acumen, including your board directors, CEO, and CxOs.

Build tech-savvy leadership teams

As technology cuts across organizational silos, leaders will only grasp its full potential and sustain high performance when they work as a team. Tech functions should be embedded across the organization, so they are not operating in silos, and there is greater trust across teams. In strategy sessions, ask what organizational challenges could be solved by a different approach to technology. These might be related to efficiency, organizational effectiveness, accountability, donor engagement, program delivery, or monitoring, evaluation & learning.

Nurture a tech culture to foster innovation

Embracing tech advantage requires leaders who know how to drive cultural change. Encourage a culture that engages constructively with failure of digital technologies and pivots quickly to test new solutions. It will also be important to demonstrate that leaders who disrupt the status quo will be appropriately recognized and rewarded.

To understand how Russell Reynolds Associates can help you in your digital journey, please visit: Capturing the TechVantage

Authors

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education and Sustainability Knowledge teams. She is based in Portland.

George Head leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Technology Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.

Nick Ricketts is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education sector. He is based in London.

Simon Kingston co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education sector. He is based in London.

Tory Clark leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Justice practice. She is based in Atlanta.

Vanessa Di Matteo is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact & Education and Sustainability Knowledge teams. She is based in London.

i 13 Tech Trends Emerging In The Nonprofit Sector This Year, Forbes Nonprofit Council, March 2021. 13 Tech Trends Emerging In The Nonprofit Sector This Year (forbes.com)

ii Nonprofit Trends Report, Salesforce.org, July 2021. ngo-report-trends-fourth-edition-111721-v1.pdf (salesforce.org)

iii A Tech-First Culture Boosts Resilience. So How Can More Leaders Build One?  RRA Analysis, September 2022. A Tech-First Culture Boosts Resilience. So How Can More Leaders Build One?   | Russell Reynolds Associates

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices