Inefficient Succession Planning Holds C-suites Back | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Inefficient Succession Planning Holds C-suites Back

Leadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsSuccessionChief Executive OfficersBoard of DirectorsCEO SuccessionC-Suite Succession

Article

Aimee Williamson

April 21, 2023

7 min

Leadership StrategiesNext Generation BoardsSuccessionChief Executive OfficersBoard of DirectorsCEO SuccessionC-Suite Succession

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Critical shortfalls in succession planning practices create strategic risk for the organization.

Close

Aimee Williamson

Sydney

C-suite performance can make or break a business. The success of the C-suite is dependent upon collaboration, accountability and future focus. However, success is not purely dependent on the current C-suite. Building a deep, diverse, and engaged succession pipeline is crucial to ensuring the continued renewal and relevance of your organization’s leadership team.

Succession planning must be viewed as a key component of C-suite success and a focus for C-suite leaders, many of whom are being held accountable to ensure appropriate succession plans are in place. In addition, boards want to see robust succession plans. When done correctly, it underpins the organization’s strategy by developing and implementing capabilities that drive its long-term success.

Despite its importance, many organizations are not approaching succession planning with enough diligence. Organizations are 1.7x more likely to have an informal, reactionary approach to succession planning than a formal, proactive one. Via Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor,
which surveyed 1,690 executives from around the world in Q4 2022, we identified three common failings in succession planning that create strategic risk for organizations:

Succession planning misalignment creates risk. Board directors and executives have differing views on the sophistication of succession planning processes in their organizations.

Next generation leaders lack confidence in the succession process. Next generation leaders are concerned about the future focus of their organization’s succession practices and view the process as inequitable and not inclusive.

Organizations are missing successor growth and development opportunities. Few organizations report that development planning for successors is part of their process.

Succession planning misalignment creates risk

Board directors and the rest of the leadership team have differing opinions regarding the sophistication of succession planning. Proactive succession planning is created well in advance of need and follows a formal process and criteria to identify and develop potential successors long before that need arises. These plans are also continually updated as business needs change. Nearly half of board directors (48%) describe their organization’s succession planning as proactive, which is notably higher than the number of CxOs who agree (28%). The rosier view among board directors is concerning, as board directors need a clear view into what’s truly happening within an organization to alleviate risk.

Meanwhile, next generation leaders (9%) are unsure of their organization’s succession planning practices, emphasizing the need for C-suite leaders to better communicate with them. While many of these leaders might not be involved in the specifics of succession planning, the lack of visibility into the process is consequential for managing the risk of next generation leaders seeking external opportunities.

Succession planning sophistication

Which statement best describes succession practices at your organization?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,690 global CEOs, C-suite leaders, next generation leaders, and non-executive board directors

Next generation leaders lack confidence in the succession process

Almost half of next generation leaders (49%) don’t believe their organization’s succession plans are future focused. Most board directors (84%), on the other hand, believe their organization’s succession plans are focused on the future. CEOs need to urgently address the lack of confidence from the next generation leaders, who may struggle to see a future path in their organization and seek opportunities elsewhere.

Less than a quarter of all leaders agree that their organization’s succession planning practices are transparent and clearly understood, underscoring the urgent need for greater transparency in the process across all levels. While over two-thirds of board directors (68%) believe succession plans are equitable and inclusive, C-suite (38%) and next generation leaders (33%) are less likely to agree. As a result, there is material retention risk for next generation leaders that, in turn, threatens eroding the succession pipeline. When combined with the uncertainty among next generation leaders around transparency and lack of communication, the lack of trust in succession planning equity and inclusion is worrisome and merits reevaluation.

Succession Practices

My organization's succession practices… (% agreeing or strongly agreeing)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,690 global CEOs, C-suite leaders, next generation leaders, and non-executive board directors

Organizations are missing successor growth and development opportunities

Only 53% of C-suite leaders report development plans for succession candidates, revealing a missed opportunity to focus on successors’ growth and development. Benchmarking internal talent against external talent is a helpful exercise for calibrating the relative strengths and development opportunities. Even so, just 41% of leaders report taking this action. It's especially important to create a more integrated succession plan, whereby the external market can be used to reduce internal succession risk, and/or renew focus on internal talent if the external market will not provide good alternatives. Without the objectivity of market benchmarking, many succession plans are based on existing relationships and performance today—not necessarily the potential of leaders in the future—which opens opportunities for inherent bias.

While 51% of all leaders say that diversity reporting is routinely included in succession practices, we know that simply hiring more diverse talent won’t solve the documented imbalance at the top. Instead, organizations need to build equitable internal talent pipelines that fuel successive leadership plans at every level.

Succession Planning Practices

To the best of your knowledge, does your organization routinely include the following in its succession practices... (% selecting yes)

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates Q4 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,690 global CEOs, C-suite leaders, next generation leaders, and non-executive board directors

Recommendations for effective C-suite succession planning

A key component of organizational success and stability is having a comprehensive C-suite succession plan. Yet too many organizations lack this critical component. Of those that have enacted succession plans, there’s still a meaningful divide within executive teams around process and goals.

To address these issues, organizations can:

Create alignment across C-suite and board: C-suite succession planning is a critical component of organizational strategy and, as such, the board needs a thorough understanding. Ensuring the board has an in-depth understanding of both the processes underpinning succession and the talent sitting within the pipeline is important. In addition to dedicated talent review sessions with the board, organizations should develop success profile(s) to ensure the succession plans reflect an accurate view of future business needs, rather than reflecting individual performance today. The success profiles should be refreshed annually in line with strategy and market shifts.

Build next-generation leader cohesion: Building trust with next generation leaders is crucial to their engagement and retention.  While transparency about who is on the succession plan can be complex, transparency and clarity about the principles that underpin the broader succession strategy should not be.  Organizations must clearly communicate strategy implications for the long-term leadership business needs, as well as how they are investing in next generation leadership development.

Focus on enabling success (not just selecting successors): Organizations need to ensure that succession is not viewed as a selection and appointment event, but rather a thoughtful process of developing and enabling leaders to grow in their skills and impact. Investments in assessment, coaching, and rigorous development planning for succession candidates is essential. To ensure that succession plans are active and ongoing, it is essential for organizations to establish regular rolling reviews to consider development and new talent, as well as the changing external environment.

Methodology

The Global Leadership Monitor (first launched in 2021) is an online survey of executives and non-executives that gathers the perspective of leaders on the impact of external trends on organizational health and their leadership implications. Russell Reynolds Associates surveyed its global network of executives using an online/mobile survey in October of 2022.

The 1,690 business leaders we surveyed in October 2022 represent: 46 countries in Africa, Asia, Americas, Europe, Middle East and Oceania. All data has been weighted by GDP to create a more representative share of the business contribution from each market.

Authors

Gabrielle Lieberman is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.

Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.

LEARN MORE ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND THE CENTER FOR LEADERSHIP INSIGHT

Acknowledgements

The authors would also like to thank their colleague, Aimee Williamson, whose perspective helped shape these findings:

Aimee Williamson leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Assessment capability globally. She is based in Sydney.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices