It Takes More Than a High IQ to Be a Successful Leader | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

It Takes More Than a High IQ to Be a Successful Leader

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Article

Clarke Murphy

July 24, 2023

4 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Executive Summary

In the face of increasing complexity, a high learning quotient (LQ) is even more important than a high IQ for visionary business leaders.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

Albert Einstein, widely recognized as one of the greatest minds of all time, offered some good advice for anyone confident in their intelligence: “Never underestimate your ignorance.”

Far too many corporate leaders ignore that counsel.

During my time at Russell Reynolds Associates, I have been fortunate to work with many bold and visionary CEOs at world-leading companies. They have shown, repeatedly, that great leadership goes well beyond the kind of intelligence certified by IQ tests, grade point averages, and other standardized measurements.

Although many undoubtedly have high IQs, they also score well on an often-overlooked, real-world test of intelligence: their learning quotient, or LQ.

No CEO can have all the answers in today’s complex and rapidly evolving business environment. The key to navigating disruption and change is not what a CEO knows but their capacity to learn, adapt, and creatively seize opportunities. That’s where a high LQ comes in.
Having a high LQ is what propels leaders forward—to listen, observe, test, fail, and keep going.

The 2008 financial crisis, digital transformation, the pandemic, sustainability… these challenges have underscored the importance of LQ.

In my book, Sustainable Leadership: Lessons of Vision, Courage, and Grit from the CEOs Who Dared to Build a Better World, I share some inspiring examples of corporate leaders who are harnessing their high LQs to deliver extraordinary sustainability (and business) results.

Learning, Listening, and Adapting to Change

The good news is that LQ is something you can develop. As a business leader, you can find outside mentors, professional consultants, and board members to give you honest feedback about where you can grow personally and professionally.

Through review processes and ongoing check-ins with your direct reports, you can actively seek information about the obstacles they face, uncovering ways to improve efficiency or accelerate the pace of transformation. By regularly engaging with stakeholders, you can keep a pulse on the issues your customers care about, so you can deliver innovative products and solutions.

That goes for me just as much as for the people I work with.

Sustainability came on my radar in 2015, so in many ways, I am starting over in my learning. It does not matter what title I hold. I am the eager kid on his first day of school with his sharpened pencils and notebook laid out neatly on the desk, ready to engage and discover. Every conversation I have is my opportunity to gain invaluable new insights. Remember: there is nobility in admitting what you don’t know.

Accepting Risk, Embracing Experimentation

When writing my book, I met with Regis Repko, Senior Vice President of Generation and Transmission Strategy at Duke Energy, who has a useful way of assessing leaders’ abilities to challenge themselves and take bold action. It involves three zones:

The green zone has a high comfort level, with well-established roles and processes, and a playbook for every activity. It does not encourage learning or change.

The red zone is where people cling to old ways that no longer work.

The yellow zone features many knowns as well as a bit of ambiguity and uncertainty.

“I always tell folks, don’t be afraid to put yourself in the yellow,” he told me. “If you’re operating in the green, you’re not learning, or at least not to the best of your abilities. If you’re in the red, you’re paralyzed and you’re not learning, either. If you’re in the yellow, you have most of it down, but there is a bit of ambiguity and uncertainty, which requires you to be in learning mode. And that is exactly the right place to be.”

And for an example of LQ in action, look no further than Henrik Henriksson, former CEO of the Swedish truck and bus manufacturer Scania. A few years ago, the company launched a fleet of biofuel-powered trucks and buses to reduce carbon emissions by 95%. But, as Henrik told me, they were struggling to attract customers, in part because the vehicles had higher upfront capital investments and operating costs.

Rather than retreat, Henrik recovered from the disappointment and adapted. Instead of trying to sell to small- and medium-sized transportation companies, he shifted attention to large multinationals (his customers’ customers) and offered a 10-year biofuel contract with each sale. The strategy succeeded. And Scania now offers the largest portfolio of engines that run on renewables.

So, it’s clear that a high LQ is essential for an effective response to the complex challenges related to sustainability. The transition to stakeholder capitalism demands bold, forward-looking leadership, with the skills to make sustainability in all its forms a core strategy.

We need more leaders who are creative and courageous enough to heed some additional guidance from Albert Einstein: “We cannot solve our problems with the same thinking we used when we created them.”

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices