Why CFOs are increasingly becoming a flight risk | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why CFOs Are Increasingly Becoming A Flight Risk

Career TransitionsLeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

January 27, 2023

6 min

Career TransitionsLeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersExecutive SearchAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Executive summary

CFO turnover is the new normal, here’s why it can be beneficial and how to manage the flight risk.

Close

Linda Barham

Chicago

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Jim Lawson

New York

2022 CFO Turnover: Is your CFO Next?

As a recession loomed in 2023, Russell Reynold Associates wanted to understand the latest CFO turnover trends in an increasingly competitive market where experienced financial leaders are few and far between.  Analyzing the CFOs of S&P 500 organizations from 2019 to 2022 (N=500), we found that:

CFO turnover continues to be up across the board

First-time CFO appointments reached a record high in 2022

With next-generation talent comes increased levels of diversity

CFOs are eyeing the top job more than ever before

CFO turnover: The new normal

In 2022, S&P 500 CFO turnover reached 17%, slightly down from 18% in 2021. Recent record levels of CFO turnover suggest that these increases are becoming the norm, as exhibited by multiple trends. Increasing retirement rates, the fight for gender diversity in the CFO role, and CFOs eyeing the top seat are all contributing to increased levels. This continuous churn brought a surplus of benefits for next-generation talent, including a record number of newly-minted CFOs stepping into the role, the continual development of succession plans, and more women promotions in finance.

Figure 1. Trending CFO Turnover

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to 2022, N= 500
Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim

Following a record year of IPOs in 2021 and a slow start to 2022, current increased market volatility had many CFOs favoring job security or putting off retirement until clear succession plans were in place. However, in the last four months of the year, we saw an unseasonal increase in CFO turnover as recessionary headwinds became clearer.

Figure 2. Quartely Percentage of Annual CFO Turnover

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to 2022, N= 500
Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim

First-time CFO appointments reach a record high as more companies become open to external finance leaders

For companies that had succession plans in place, CFO turnover poses little to no issue, with 62% of turnover being filled by succession candidates. As more CFOs exit the market, to retire or to non-CFO roles, those searching externally are increasingly looking to first-time CFOs in a competitive market, bringing the number of first-time CFOs to a record high of 75%.

Figure 3. Internal versus External CFO Appointments

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to 2022, N= 500
Note: 6 of the new CFOs are interim

With next-generation talent comes increased levels of diversity

While the appointment of women CFOs decreased year over year, new women CFO appointments continue to outpace the S&P 500, contributing to an uptick in gender diversity year over year.

Figure 4. New Women CFO Appointments versus the S&P 500 Women CFOs

Source: RRA analysis of S&P500 CFOs from 2019 to 2022, N= 500

Succession planning continues to pay off, as the majority of women CFOs were appointed internally and as first-time CFOs. As the number of women CFOs increase, sitting women CFOs are increasingly sought after, increasing the number of women CFOs who are poached from other S&P 500 companies.

Figure 5. Women CFO’s internal versus external appointments and experience

CFOs are eyeing the top seat

CFO retirement rates increased for the first time in three years, as the laggards of the baby boomer generation move to retire, having delayed retirement due to COVID-19 or uncertain economic outlook.

Figure 6. Trending CFO Departures

Source: RRA analysis of S&P 500 CFOs from 2019 to 2022, N= 500

As some move to retire, others are moving to take on their next challenge, having grown tired of the CFO role. Fortunately, many remain loyal, with 67% of those moving into new roles doing so at their current organization.

Figure 7. 2022 CFO exits

Source: RRA analysis of S&P 500 CFOs from 2019 to 2022, N= 500

Approximately four out of five CFOs are opting for non-CFOs roles, with the top role being President or CEO. In fact, in 2022, four times more CFOs transitioned into the top seat, compared to 2021. As organizations move to create optionality in their succession plans, the CFO is increasingly becoming a favorable choice to develop due to their competencies and board exposure.1 If not ready for the top spot, CFOs are also transitioning into non-finance VP roles or division president roles, likely with the aim of developing the key skills and competencies needed for the top seat.

Is your CFO a flight risk?

With increased CFO turnover becoming the new norm, organizations should ask themselves: are we taking actionable and targeted steps to prepare for a potential CFO exit?

To plan for the probable, Russell Reynolds Associates recommends the following retention strategies to engage finance talent.

Engage in ongoing career development conversations to retain your CFO

With CFOs increasingly eyeing the CEO role, take stock of their viability as potential CEO successors. Understand the key competencies they need to possess to move into the top seat and identify whether that includes expanding their current role, or taking a brief stint as COO or a division president/CEO to develop these competencies.

Plan for retirement

The average age of the CFOs that retired or exclusively took board roles in 2022 was 56. Don’t be afraid to open a dialogue around their plans for retirement based on career conversations.

Continue to invest in succession planning

Based on career development conversations with your CFO, re-assess your CFO succession plan to ensure timelines align with your CFO’s career goals. Pending approved timelines, further probe into whether you are looking deep enough in your organization, your assessment and development methodologies, and your overall transition plan.

Check in with underrepresented minorities

Via our 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, Russell Reynolds found that the top reasons underrepresented executives left their jobs were seeking better pay, career advancement, and different company culture. Invest in creating clear job paths for finance talent with multiple entry points and progression routes and make these paths visible to all employees as part of their onboarding and development conversations. Furthermore, prioritizing the design and development of structured sponsorship programs that target underrepresented groups can further help retain talent.

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Americas Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Chicago.

Jenna Fisher co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Palo Alto.

Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Global Financial Officers Practice. He is based in New York.

Catherine Schroeder leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Toronto.

Additional RRA Reading

Is the CFO the Right Next CEO?, Russell Reynolds Associates, 2022

Global Leadership Monitor, Russell Reynolds Associates, 2022

Why CFOs Are Increasingly Becoming A Flight Risk

Download PDF

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices