What to Look For in Your Next Portfolio Company CEO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What to Look For in Your Next Portfolio Company CEO

Portfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinance OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

Article

July 28, 2021

4 min

Portfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinance OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

Executive Summary

To succeed in today’s business environment, PE firms and portfolio company CEOs will need to take a more dynamic approach to executing their value creation plans.

Close

Sean Dineen

Boston

Jeff Warren

Los Angeles

As PE investment professionals reassess investment and value creation strategies, it may be time to reconsider the talent required to achieve them.

The pandemic has stretched portfolio company leaders in new ways. Since the beginning of 2020, it has become clear that some are able to flex to make the most of a volatile and uncertain period. Others have doubled down on their existing strategies, working harder and longer – but not necessarily getting the results they wanted.

As we reflected on this period, we wanted to understand how leadership behavior and style has played into these successes and struggles. To help uncover the answers, we analyzed CEO leadership data through the lens of our proprietary Leadership Span framework.

Developed in collaboration with Hogan Assessments, Leadership Span assesses how well leaders perform in four key categories: Setting Strategy, Executing for Results, Leading Teams and Relationships & Influence.

Within each category, it reveals how fluidly an executive can move between a set of “loud” competencies (disruptive, risk taking, heroic, galvanizing) that underpin our common stereotypes of leaders and their “quiet” counterparts (pragmatic, reluctant, vulnerable, connecting) that create depth and staying power.

How do private equity portfolio company leaders rate? Our Leadership Span data shows that portfolio company CEOs are likely to score higher on all the loud dimensions of leadership than other CEOs but are less likely to draw on the quieter dimensions.

This finding has both positive and negative implications. In general, loud qualities serve portfolio companies exceptionally well when they are in growth mode, as they fuel forward momentum. When growth slows, however, portfolio company CEOs may face more challenges than others.

Looking more closely at the data, three themes stand out:

Portfolio company CEOs tend to take a more disruptive approach to setting strategy than other CEOs. Yet they are less likely to filter ideas for feasibility, leaving them open to moving too fast or in the wrong direction.

Portfolio company CEO’s are more likely than the average leader to take risks. They are less likely than others to think about what happens if things go wrong, leaving them more vulnerable to failure when conditions change unexpectedly.

The ability to empathize with employees - not just inspire or prod them - has become increasingly important. Yet portfolio company CEOs are less likely than other CEOs to show vulnerability in leading their teams, putting them at risk of losing key team members and eroding morale.

To succeed in today’s business environment, portfolio company CEOs will require a wider range of leadership competencies than they may have needed in the past. In hiring new leaders, PE firms will want to continue to prioritize loud qualities, while filtering for the ability to shift gears and take a more measured and humble approach when conditions warrant it.

Key steps for PE firms to take now:

Make value creation plans and scorecards multidimensional: To get ahead of the next wave of change, PE firms will want to create more dynamic strategies and scorecards for their portfolio companies, rather than making one-dimensional assumptions about what will happen in the future.

Appoint more agile leaders: In keeping with more dynamic planning, PE firms will want to hire CEOs who can adapt their styles quickly when needed, shifting from the classic hard charging, growth-oriented mode to a more measured approach that shores up the organization for long term survival.

Support leaders who are struggling to pivot: While many executives lean naturally to one side or another of the loud-quiet spectrum, most can strengthen their weaknesses with the right support. We see a number of PE firms employing coaches for their top portfolio company leaders for this very reason. Consider providing this type of support for leaders who might be struggling to pivot, making sure they have clear development goals and strategies that are in line with the needs of the organization.

Build balance across the leadership team: CFOs are the classic counterpoint to CEOs; other executives also provide unique strengths to make the leadership team whole. Look for a mix of strengths across the C-suite to ensure readiness in a volatile environment.

Looking ahead

As businesses move into a post-pandemic era, it will be necessary for PE firms to recalibrate both value creation plans and the leadership competencies required to achieve them. While the classic growth-oriented portfolio company CEO archetype has many benefits, additional leadership competencies will be needed to succeed in the future, namely agility, empathy and balance. These qualities will allow executives to adapt quickly to a rapidly changing business environment and provide both the operational and people leadership required to move forward in the face of headwinds.

Additional Authors

Carrie Ngo and Jason Steinert

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices