Amazing Things Can Happen When Organizations Are Led by Sustainably Minded Thinkers | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Amazing Things Can Happen When Organizations Are Led by Sustainably Minded Thinkers

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

Article

Constantine Alexandrakis

October 26, 2021

4 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

Corporations simply will not have access to capital, talent, or reputational trust unless effective sustainability agendas and priorities are clearly evident.

Close

Constantine Alexandrakis

Chicago

A seismic shift has occurred. Sustainability has become a true societal and business imperative, and it has never been more important for boards and leaders to approach every decision with a sustainable mindset.

In today’s world, profit is becoming impossible without sustainable business practices. Gone are the days of winning business because of beating competitors on cost. It is becoming table stakes to show how and where sustainability is at the core of the approach, or risk being dismissed altogether. Corporations simply will not have access to capital, talent, or reputational trust unless effective sustainability agendas and priorities are clearly evident.

We have surveyed thousands of global corporate directors, C-suite executives, board-level talent, and recruiting teams over the course of the past 18+ months, and what has emerged is an awareness of just how much companies understand the need to focus on sustainability, yet those we depend on most to drive this change and champion this cause – boards and CEOs – struggle to take the first step toward engaging and are starkly behind. Our research found that one-third of C-suite leaders cite organizational complexity and bureaucracy as the primary obstacle to embedding sustainability into their overall business strategy.

So how do we course correct and get on the right path in a swift and sound manner?

Put the board in the driver’s seat guided by a lens of sustainability.

The sustainability agenda starts and ends with the board. Every single member of the board should be viewing the company and its operations with sustainability at the core. Structure the board to engage meaningfully, bringing the same focus to the issue as they do on other critical operational and business areas, like governance and compensation. This will create connective tissue, tying sustainability into other board discussions. Our research points to progress in this area: sustainability is now seen as a critical leadership competency for directors (63 percent) and senior executives (77 percent).

Furthermore, rethink the company strategy to ensure that sustainability is a thread woven throughout, rather than an afterthought, or worse yet, a strategy all on its own. This signals that the board is not just supportive of corporate sustainability efforts but is an active partner in orienting the company around sustainability. Key components of the strategy should be blatantly linked to sustainability, including compensation, recruitment, training and development and performance management – and make these links public for all to see.

Work collaboratively while harnessing a challenger mindset.

While the board’s buy-in and deployment of a sustainable strategy throughout the business is vital, they cannot operate in a vacuum. A collaborative partnership between the board leaders and the CEO and other senior executives is essential. Directors must embed sustainability into all interactions with the CEO and executive team to ensure that the topic is constantly top-of-mind. This fosters a dynamic where executives continually think of sustainability as part of their overall remit, even when not explicitly tasked with it. These are complex issues and integration and alignment over the long term is the pathway to productive and meaningful results.

Embrace different viewpoints and experiences to truly unlock powerful changes. Boards are far more effective in a challenger role versus that of a gatekeeper role. When a board simply rallies around the mindset of the C-suite instead of bringing new ideas and posing questions – which often infuses positive contrarianism – progress becomes paralyzed.

Do not believe the hype – adding a sustainability expert is not a silver bullet.

One of the biggest myths I hear in discussions around sustainability strategies is that by hiring an expert in sustainability the organization will solve the equation. The reality is more complex. Boards must be filled with sustainability-minded directors. The C-suite needs leaders with sustainability competencies across all aspects of the business.

If sustainability is viewed as a mindset versus expertise, the result is an organization that is guided by sustainable values and beliefs. The same is true when recruiting for CEOs. When CEOs have bought into the sustainability strategy, stakeholders see that a company’s commitment starts at the top. Without that alignment, sustainability is likely to be forgotten from the overall business strategy and other corporate activities.

Positive momentum is starting to build in shifting this mindset; a recent analysis we conducted of job specifications showed that 41 percent of the searches our RRA consultants conducted in 2021 referenced sustainability, which is up from just 15 percent in 2019 and 9 percent in 2015.

Go all in.

This is arguably the most important tenet overall. We have found overwhelmingly that when boards do decide to increase their focus on sustainability, they struggle with where to start and how much effort to put behind actions. Do not hesitate; do not put this off another year – the time is now. Going all-in and taking swift action will reap dividends and the payoff will materialize quickly. Fast track companies quickly outpace those taking a systematic, phased-in approach. Maturity can be reached in about half the time, while others move slowly or stall out altogether. Our recent Divides and Dividends report keyed in on this topic, revealing that more than one-third of C-suite leaders say that slow-changing company culture is becoming a real impediment for business.

Set clear goals and metrics for tracking progress toward sustainability measures and share traction with stakeholders. Around every corner, I see an insatiable hunger for tomorrow’s leaders to be creative change agents and to construct a new vision for the future. We must empower our leaders to rise to the challenge to deliver meaningful change with a sustainable mindset. There is simply too much to lose.

Sustainable LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

A Beacon in the Storm: C-suite Mentoring as a Leadership Imperative

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCulture RiskSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalVenture Capital and GrowthConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesFinTechGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementPrivate CreditInvestment ManagementReal EstateFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

From Risk Management to Risk Navigation: Why Strategic Risk Officers Have Never Been So Vital – Or So Challenged – in Financial Services

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices