Winning C-suite Dynamics in a Post-Pandemic World | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Winning C-suite Dynamics in a Post-Pandemic World

Board and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite Succession

Article

Caitlin MacNamara

September 28, 2021

5 min

Board and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite Succession

Executive Summary

The silver lining for CEOs and CHROs is that they were given a clear picture of the strengths and weaknesses of their C-suite team members.

Close

Caitlin MacNamara

Toronto
New York

The pandemic has put a spotlight on leaders and their ability to navigate challenges. A top human resources executive said it best: “the COVID crisis was like the tide going out and you could see which of your executives still had their bathing suits on”. That summed up what I was hearing from our clients – in terms of talent, culture, and strategy.

There is no doubt that the disruptive nature of the pandemic – a crisis with no roadmap – tested leadership at every level, but this was especially true in the C-suite. Those charged with navigating companies through an immediate pivot and then an ever-shifting and often variable environment were not able to rely on past experience to support them along the way. It has been a time where leadership skills far outweigh functional expertise.

The silver lining for CEOs and CHROs is that they were given a clear picture of the strengths and weaknesses of their C-suite team members. The question is “what to do with that insight?” It’s a topic that I, along with two of my colleagues (Greg Hodge, a consultant in our Customer Activation and Growth practice, and Bobbie Lenga, co-leader of the Americas Omnichannel Retail and Luxury Practice) discussed in a white paper focused on how companies can structure their top-level to accelerate progress, growth and success.

Post-pandemic, the consensus is that future-proofing leadership requires solving for the right structure, the right people and the right culture. It’s not just about right-sizing the C-suite. Equally important is having leaders who can lead and a culture that allows them to do so.

To help frame a strategy discussion around where your organization is and where you should be, we’ve identified some considerations in each of these areas (structure, leadership capability and culture). We recognize that there is no silver bullet solution. These are aimed at helping CEOs and boards to be more intentional in creating the organization that can and will deliver on the vision and mission more quickly, effectively and successfully.

Structure

When designing a structure, the goal is agility and productivity. Structure is done right, where form follows corporate strategy, positions a company to succeed, which often plays out in stronger go-to-market approaches, better execution, and more efficient allocation of resources to drive the financial returns.

As ever-changing consumer demands, behaviors, and expectations have driven disruptions across consumer businesses, new C-suite roles were created and/or existing roles re-defined to augment talent in the C-suite to address these disruptions.

However, the danger of adding roles to the top level is a bloated structure can stifle decision-making and productivity. While some vertical expertise is needed, the reality is that a streamlined structure, with a healthy balance of expert and hybrid roles, creates an environment of efficiency, accelerates innovation and drives focus on execution.

Besides the logistical challenges for a CEO to effectively manage a C-suite with 10 to 14 executives, the structure itself often forces the CEO into a more directive role.

A leaner organization is more likely to create an environment that is more collaborative, allowing the CEO to be a counselor and their direct reports to have the freedom to execute, with a deeper bench of talent with which to deliver more holistic market solutions. This has many benefits, including building a strong pool of talent for succession. Importantly, each company’s strategic needs and access to talent differs, so there is no specific template, but there should be a focus on a balance between expert and hybrid roles, ensuring leaders have a line of sight across the organization.

Leadership Capability

Over the past year, CEOs and board members have been surprised – pleasantly or not – at what they have seen from their leaders. Some leaders, who may not have been on the radar, unexpectedly stepped up, demonstrating flexibility and agility; others struggled to pivot, focus on the most important initiatives and/or motivate their teams.

Looking ahead, an important consideration for leaders who are on succession paths is how they navigated these uncharted waters. This will help identify those agile leaders who can fill the leadership pipeline and ensure you have the best players on the team when you need them most.

Culture

In this context we are talking about creating a culture within the executive team to capitalize on the lean organization. There are several keys to behaviors that can bolster success in this regard:

Communicate regularly and frequently, this helps move decision making along and mitigates confusion.

Focus on coaching to encourage collaboration and give your team the freedom and confidence they need to execute.

Maintain a focus on strategy, leaving execution at the operations level and allowing the executive team to prioritize strategy and growth.

Be humble. Leaders who believe good ideas can come from anywhere are ideal for a smaller leadership team – they aren’t too proud to look deeper within the organization for solutions.

A lean structure alone does not equal success. You will get the most out of the structure when you create a culture around it.

We’ve spent a lot of time with leaders as they try to deal with insights uncovered by this pandemic. Often times, they come to us wanting to solve for just one area that became a pain point in moving their business through new challenges. What we’ve been helping all of our clients see is that a formula of right structure, people and culture together will create organizations that can navigate the future – whatever that future happens to be.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices