Return to Work Strategies for 2022 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Best Foot Forward: What’s your next move in the workplace dance of 2022

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipTransformation and InnovationLeadership

Article

March 09, 2022

3 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipTransformation and InnovationLeadership

Executive summary

We look at how business leaders can find the right balance between the home and office.

Close

As we gradually recalibrate the parameters of the 2022 workplace dynamic, the question business leaders are really grappling with is this: How do I get the balance right?

On the one hand, many executives want to embrace the possibilities of the brave new world of hybrid working, but on the other, they’re really keen to make up for lost time and re-ignite the collective sense of purpose, belonging and ownership that can often shape the DNA of a successful workforce.

Two years since the start of the global pandemic, it’s fair to say that employers and employees are renegotiating the rules of engagement in real-time. It’s a little bit like a dance move – who leads and who follows? And how do we find the ideal combination to ensure that we’re moving in the right direction?
Based on my recent conversations, the workplace dance of 2022 is far from straightforward. In fact, it often feels like the employer wants to Waltz whilst the employees have started to Samba. We’re all dancing to different tunes at the moment. So, who makes the first move?

The traditional view would be that the more experienced partner, generally the boss, takes the lead. But with ambition, agility, and different skillsets all hallmarks of our talented future leaders, it’s clear that the direction of the dance lies partly in their hands.

Like any partnership, the key to success lies in collaboration, and, for me, this starts with open and honest dialogue – what is the plan and how are we going to make it work together?

When I speak to employers, some of them are telling me they prefer an organic approach (“Let’s see how this develops”), whereas others are keen to make an intervention. There are risks with both – the former could cause frustration or confusion, but the latter could prove divisive or unpopular.

A good example of this balance in action is hybrid meetings with some participants face to face and others remote – do businesses dictate the format of a meeting, either face-to-face or remote, or do they give people the option to choose?

In this case, we need to figure out whether the task is better face to face or equally effective both ways. But either way, the crucial point is to explain why rather than leaving people feeling it’s on a whim. We need to have a reason for every choice, it can’t just be because that is what we used to do pre-pandemic or that “the boss likes it that way”. Staff may not always agree with the rationale, but it will bring more clarity and understanding.

Two other workplace scenarios I’m observing are the “Mirror Effect” where employees are aping the behavior of their boss or line manager to increase their own profile, and the “Last Minute U-Turn” where an employee has planned a day in the office but prompted by workload or efficiency concerns, makes a late call to work from home. We need to manage scenarios like this in a way that can nurture both a healthy culture and a healthy career path.

When addressing all of these questions, it’s important to remember we’re in a quickly evolving situation here – there’s no going back, just as there was no going back in the wake of the Industrial Revolution when it was agreed that the five-day week was the most efficient way for our working lives to function.

Digitalisation has opened up so many more possibilities which allow us to tailor solutions for individual needs – the fact that different jobs have different requirements has been factored into business strategy for a number of years now. A good example is American Express whose Bluework Programme assigns employees to one of four categories – Hub, Club, Home, and Roam. I expect to see more of this in the near future.

The case for a return to the office is powerfully supported by the clear benefits of creativity, collaboration, and learning and development, all of which tend to flourish in an office environment. However, it’s fair to say that claims of these benefits may also be obscuring the fact that leaders want to have a real sense of power and control, whether that be sheer physical presence, or a high spec, immaculately furnished personal office that screams “I’m The Boss!” These are important factors in defining a workplace identity.

None of this is easy and it’s absolutely clear that restarting is a lot more difficult than shutting down. When COVID-19 struck in early 2020, we had no choice but to leave the office. In early 2022 we have arguably too many choices in front of us. By nature, restarting is a more drawn-out process than shutting down and its inevitable missteps will come at a cost, both financially and from a productivity point of view.

It’s going to be fascinating to see how things develop in the coming months and years. For now, all eyes remain on the workplace dancefloor.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices