ESG 2.0 - The Next Generation of Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

ESG 2.0 - The Next Generation of Leadership

Sustainable LeadershipSustainability Officers

Article

Kurt Harrison

August 20, 2021

3 min

Sustainable LeadershipSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

The current level of demand for ESG leadership talent is unsurpassed, and is generating changes to earlier ESG leadership archetypes.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

ESG 2.0 - The Next Generation of Leadership

Even firms with long-standing track records of successfully integrating ESG principles into their organizations are finding it more difficult than ever to stay ahead of dynamic and constantly evolving ESG expectations. Companies that have previously resisted establishing a formalized ESG policy and framework are finally bowing to pressure from their investors, consumers, employees, boards, and regulators, are now find themselves scrambling to catch up. As ESG has gone from being a functional requirement to a commercial imperative, best-in-class organizations are embracing ESG in part because they firmly believe in the financial benefits of incorporating sustainability into their corporate and investment strategies.

All of these factors have led to an avalanche of demand for ESG leadership talent, straining what was already a very thin talent pool. It is clear that next-generation ESG leaders will look quite different from earlier archetypes, as the scope of the role grows and requires a far more senior and agile executive to be considered as a credible “ESG 2.0” leader

To better understand this shift and the specific competencies and experience that firms are seeking, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed the backgrounds of 46 senior ESG leaders from large, global organizations appointed over the past 18 months. Our data reveal that these leaders are predominantly female, overwhelmingly hired from outside of the company versus being promoted into the role, and bring cross-functional business expertise to the position.

ESG 2.0 leaders have four primary responsibilities:

Create a best-in-class enterprise-wide ESG policy and framework

Integrate ESG policy across the organization, ensuring a consistency of messaging and execution throughout each business line/investment strategy

Serve as the “face of the franchise” both internally and externally, articulating to investors how ESG permeates all levels of the organization and is embedded into each business line/investment strategy

Engage with external partners (portfolio companies, operating partners, supply chain) to help them create more sustainable business strategies for their own organizations

ESG 1.0

The initial wave of ESG hiring began in earnest three to four years ago, when C-suite leaders began to tire of being asked questions about ESG that they could not readily answer.

This led many organizations to appoint a “head of ESG,” which usually tapped an internal employee coming out of legal, compliance, marketing, or investor relations. These ESG heads were generally mid-level functional executives reporting into compliance or marketing, and were tasked with creating a basic fundamental ESG framework designed to satisfy internal and external questions as they arose.

This minimalist approach worked initially, but investors continued to raise the bar on the level of ESG sophistication, measurement, and reporting they required, most notably reflected in BlackRock’s annual letter to CEOs heralding the importance of corporate purpose. By 2019, the “ESG 1.0” model had proven to be insufficient.

ESG 2.0

Just as ESG demands from investors, consumers and regulators began to reach a fever pitch in 2020, the world was hit with simultaneous global crises: COVID-19, climate change, racial and social injustice, and dysfunctional geopolitics. When it became clear that ESG policies and frameworks could provide a roadmap for organizations

to emerge more effectively from these concurrent global crises, the demand for ESG leadership talent exploded. Organizations now require more credible and more senior leaders who combine ESG domain expertise with business/ P&L backgrounds, and diversity of thought and experience.

ESG evolution

ESG 1.0 leaders were:

Repurposed internal employees

Functional background, no prior ESG expertise

Mid-level, reporting into a functional head

ESG 2.0 leaders are:

Senior executives who combine ESG expertise with industry experience

Business background focused on value creation

MD/executive level, reporting to CEO/president/ executive committee/board

Global citizens with a global perspective

World-class influencing skills

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates

An analysis of recent ESG appointments confirms that this shift is already underway. In analyzing the profiles of almost 50 leaders from large, global organizations appointed in the last 18 months, several patterns emerge.

Many are inaugural appointments

Unsurprisingly, just over one-third of the recently appointed leaders in our analysis are the first to hold this position in their company, reflecting the nascency of this role in many firms and the degree to which role creation has accelerated in the last 18 months.

35% are the first to hold the role in their company

Almost all were appointed externally, reflecting the growing need for domain expertise

In 2021 and beyond, an ESG leader needs to deliver ESG domain expertise – the days of a repurposed functional executive being credible in these roles are over. Our analysis found that 93% were appointed externally as opposed to being promoted from an internal role, with 80% having prior experience in an ESG or sustainability-related role. It is clear that firms recognize the need to bring in specialized expertise from outside the organization to drive a transformation in ESG performance.

93% were appointed externally, reflecting the shift away from internal promotions into this role

Many bring multi-functional business experience and a diversity of perspective

At the same time, best-in-class ESG leaders are business people first, with hands-on industry experience that will enable them to be credible with the internal line of business leaders. Just under 40% of recently appointed leaders have prior experience in financial officer roles, while another 26% have experience in corporate strategy. In contrast to earlier trends in the ESG 1.0 era, demand for legal and marketing experience is low among recently appointed leaders, with only 11% having prior experience in legal, regulatory or compliance focused roles, and only 4% coming from a marketing or communications background.

Next-gen ESG leaders are senior executives who are fluent across the suite of ESG dimensions with an industry- specific commercial acumen. These individuals must also possess the ability to successfully influence across an incredibly diverse set of stakeholders, including the C-suite and board of directors, line of business leaders, institutional investors, legal & compliance, regulators, external partners (portfolio companies, operating partners, supply chain) and internal colleagues. Given this mandate, it is no wonder that more than a quarter of recently appointed leaders have prior experience in three or more functions, providing them with a multi-faceted perspective on how ESG priorities get translated across the business.

Senior ESG leaders are likely to have experience across multiple functions, most often sustainability, finance and corporate strategy. In contrast to earlier trends, demand for legal and marketing experience is low.

Strong female representation at the top

The ESG function has also managed to avoid the cultural and structural barriers that have limited the number of female executives ascending to senior roles – 70% of recently appointed senior ESG leaders are female. This may result from the fact that, as a relatively new role, the paths to ESG leadership remain varied and multi-faceted, allowing companies to expand the aperture of their search for the best talent.

As companies seek greater gender diversity in the C-suite, it would appear that the ESG function will be an important pipeline of talent, particularly given their cross-functional expertise and visibility into both the operational and strategic aspects of the business.

70% of the newly appointed senior leaders are female

Attracting best-in-class ESG leadership

Next-generation ESG leaders will look very different from their “ESG 1.0” predecessors. In trying to identify and recruit this talent, it is crucial that:

ESG be perceived as a core component of the organization’s business strategy

ESG is a stated priority for the C-suite and board

The head of ESG reports directly to the C-suite

An absence of these criteria will make it difficult (if not impossible) to attract best-in-class ESG leadership. Where is your organization in its ESG journey? See appendix for our self-assessment tool.

Key questions for determining where you are in your sustainability lifecycle:

Strategy: How is sustainability viewed by your senior leadership – a commercially accretive imperative or an issue to be managed?

Ownership: What level of ownership do your senior leaders take in driving your sustainability initiatives? Is your leadership culture an enabler or a hurdle in this regard?

Reporting: What sustainability goals have you set, and how do your stakeholders view the ambitiousness of those goals and your ability to measure and report against them?

Senior executive talent management: How does sustainability factor into your leadership talent decisions? Is it a key competency when selecting, promoting and rewarding leaders?

Nascent

Reactive – reacting to issues as they emerge and managing them through a PR and brand lens

Head of ESG is a mid-level role and/or responsibility sits within a function like marketing or corporate affairs; integration with strategy is minimal

No or limited reporting; if it exists, reporting is backward-looking and lacks measurable goals

Sustainability, purpose and values are not core to talent management frameworks

Evolving

Proactive – sustainability is increasingly seen as a source of competitive advantage and/or risk mitigation

Appointed senior ESG Leader with a dedicated team, who reports to the CEO or other ExCo member; increasing integration with strategy

Annual sustainability report with clearly stated goals and progress made against them

Focus on values and purpose underpins talent management frameworks

Best-in-Class

Strategic – sustainability is embedded in strategy and used to evaluate new opportunities; existing operations are overhauled to make them more sustainable

ESG Leader is a senior member of the firm, sits on Ex/OpCo and reports to the CEO; sustainability goals are embedded in objectives of C-suite leaders

Sustainability reporting is embedded in the annual report

Explicit focus on sustainability experience and mindset in selection and development; sustainability outcomes linked to remuneration for executives

Additional Authors

Beijing Zhu is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services sector Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

Research Authors

Emily Meneer

Sustainable LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

A Beacon in the Storm: C-suite Mentoring as a Leadership Imperative

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCulture RiskSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalVenture Capital and GrowthConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesFinTechGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementPrivate CreditInvestment ManagementReal EstateFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

From Risk Management to Risk Navigation: Why Strategic Risk Officers Have Never Been So Vital – Or So Challenged – in Financial Services

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices