A Look into Asia’s Sustainability Talent Market | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

A Look into Asia’s Sustainability Talent Market

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceConsumerSustainability Officers

Article

Michelle Chan Crouse

May 04, 2022

7 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceConsumerSustainability Officers

Executive summary

The explosive demand for sustainability professionals is creating a talent shortage in the industry, especially in Asia.

Close

Michelle Chan Crouse

Singapore

Concerns about climate change, investor pressure, and an ongoing transition to a green economy have brought sustainability to the forefront of executive’s minds across the globe. While different countries and regions are responding at varying speeds in taking collective action, global organizations are recognizing that they must make meaningful and impactful change quickly or risk losing customer loyalty. Within Asia, sustainability is a rapidly growing topic, as consumers demand increased transparency across ingredient sourcing, manufacturing, and broader corporate governance. In a recent McKinsey study,1 Indonesian consumers were found to feel more strongly in favor of promoting sustainability than the average global consumer and are willing to spend more to “go green.” As such, companies are beginning to think about how to incorporate this important dimension into their day-to-day operations and need the talent to be able to drive these initiatives.

The explosive demand for sustainability professionals is creating a talent shortage in the industry, especially in Asia. To help firms better understand how to hire and retain sustainability leaders, Russell Reynolds Associates set out to analyze the sustainability talent in the Asian market. We conducted an in-depth analysis of 69 senior sustainability professionals across the consumer and industrial industries in the region including Australia, China, India, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and Vietnam to understand the talent market and the profile of these leaders. Additionally, we compared these data points to RRA’s proprietary global benchmark of sustainability executives.

Our findings identified several trends:

01 The Head of Sustainability role is becoming broader in scope and more senior in profile

As expectations for sustainable strategy and operations grow, more companies are elevating the seniority and profile for this role. For example, a global consumer products organization has broken out the sustainability role from the communications function and made it a standalone role reporting into the head of their Asia and Middle East region. This is a result of the role’s scope becoming broader and requiring management of more senior stakeholders, influencing leaders to see the long-term benefits of sustainability, and supporting the organization in the change journey.

02 Lack of a career track has led to a dearth of talent

As the importance of sustainability is only now gaining traction, the talent pool is thin. In large part, this is because these roles were traditionally embedded into other functional roles, such as communications, procurement, and supply chain. In order to progress their careers, these leaders were required to wear multiple hats and broaden their expertise beyond a pure sustainability focus. Given the nascency of the role, there is almost no talent in the market that has grown up in focused sustainability roles—and the specialized talent that does exist is being snapped up quickly.

03 Talent everywhere is increasingly pivoting to purpose-based roles

Regardless of their historic focus, we see an increasing number of senior leaders seeking to pivot their skillsets to the sustainability arena. The pandemic raised awareness around sustainability issues, the inter-connectedness of markets and the role of business in society at large, while also giving candidates a chance to step back and think about their longer-term goals in life. The result has been a large increase in uptake of sustainability-related educational degrees and corporate training. An as example, Ernst & Young has partnered with Hult University to offer any of its 312,000 global staff the chance to earn a MA degree in sustainability.2

Profiles of Asian sustainability leaders

Senior executive profiles in the Asian market are continuously evolving, and differentiated by a few characteristics:

01 The scale is tipped on gender diversity:

Gender diversity in the region is strong, with 60% of sustainability leaders identifying as female. Given the nascency of the ESG function and the fluidity of background requirements, companies have been able to look beyond a traditional search aperture for best in class in talent. In turn, there have been fewer barriers for female executives ascending to senior roles. As companies continue to prioritize diversity in the C-suite, the ESG function will be an important talent pool to leverage, especially given the cross-functional expertise of these leaders. While organizations are moving towards increased diversity and alignment on a global scale, recruiting, retaining, and developing sustainable talent must be a priority.

02 Narrow talent pool in a nascent function:

Only recently have organizations really prioritized building out sustainability capabilities, given that 43% of sustainability leaders have been in the role for one to three years. Right now, companies are still reacting to investor, consumer, and organizational pressure to “go green,” as opposed to thinking strategically about opportunities for value creation and long-term talent needs. As organizations respond and hire executives, it is an even split between internal vs. external appointments (52% vs. 48%, respectively.) Given the nascency of the role, organizations are looking everywhere they can for talent, rather than making concentrated efforts to develop pipelines.

03 Leaders spike in communications:

As discussed above, Asian sustainability leaders hail from a wide range of backgrounds. That said, 70% of these leaders have communications in their background, while only 10% bring strategy experience. This is in stark contrast to global benchmarks, which show that sustainability leaders in other regions tend to be most experienced in strategy and are least likely to bring communications experience to their role.3

Functional Background of Sustainability Leaders

RRA Proprietary Analysis, 2021

Given the functional backgrounds of leaders in the region, “The Storyteller” is the most commonly observed archetype. This type of leader can connect with stakeholders, build brand equity, and link corporate purpose to all messaging. This externally orientated approach is common in organizations that focus on managing reputational risk, as opposed to those focused on improving their environmental footprint. Ultimately, as organizations seek to attract best-in-class talent, they will need to move towards the other archetypes to stay relevant and avoid green-washing accusations. As the function advances and becomes more intertwined with overall business strategy, best-in-class talent is increasingly looking for strategic sustainability roles, as opposed to those with purely marketing and communications flavors.

Team structures

Chief sustainability officers, who report to regional heads, are hard to come by in Asia. One can find sustainability leads embedded within different functions:

In industrial companies, the sustainability leader reports into supply chain because of manufacturing’s importance

Within more consumer-based companies where marketing and brand identity are key, this person typically sits in communications/marketing

In more regulated companies (e.g., tobacco), sustainability leaders sit in government affairs/corporate affairs departments, reflecting their role in ensuring the company navigates increasingly strict regulatory restrictions

In companies where there is a large compliance component to sustainability, this talent typically sits in the audit/finance function

More companies are breaking sustainability out from corporate affairs/finance/supply chain to be a standalone function typically reporting directly into the regional head. For example, a multinational consumer products organization recently hired a Head of Sustainability for the region as opposed to dropping the role into an already developed function. By separating out sustainability, organizations are elevating the role and ultimately allowing for more cross-functional collaboration, agility, and autonomy for these leaders.

Recommendations for companies looking to hire sustainability talent

Clarify your focus: Be very clear on the focus of your ESG strategy and the stakeholders to whom it addresses, as this
will help identify the required skillset and therefore the talent needed. What sustainability issues does your company
grapple with the most? Which stakeholders are most important to engage, and do you understand their priorities? Be it
packaging or environmental concerns, have a firm handle on the focus areas so you can prioritize those skillsets.

Internal candidates often a plus: If your organization is complex with many explicit and implicit stakeholders to manage,
an internal candidate often experiences better initial traction, as they will be able to manage a familiar landscape while
implementing changes. More than many other senior roles, sustainability leaders must be masters of persuasion and
influence, and pre-existing networks within the organization can make this easier.

Be clear and realistic about sustainability leaders’ credentials: External candidates in Asia will not have had long
careers in sustainability, as it is a new function. Set those expectations upfront with senior management. In many cases,
there is a desire for local talent representing the sustainability agenda; however, if deep sustainability expertise and
experience is needed, in most cases this talent will come from outside of Asia.

Prioritize passion & commercial orientation for the topic: Through our work supporting companies with talent to drive
sustainability agendas, RRA found that a passion for the subject, along with specific set of leadership skills identified
below, are leading indicators for the ability to make an impact in the sustainable leader role.

Russell Reynolds developed a new model of sustainable leadership that helps companies to effectively select, promote, and
develop their own ESG leaders. These individuals demonstrate four critical leadership attributes, which are driven by their
sustainable mindsets:

For more detail on the model, please read RRA’s “Assessing and Selecting Sustainable Leaders | Russell Reynolds Associates.”

Post-pandemic, as we look to redesign our companies, recruitment processes, and promotion paths for all future leaders, it is more critical than ever to identify sustainable leadership that will improve the way the world is led.

Authors

Michelle Chan Crouse is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer practice. She is based in Singapore.
Neha Agarwal is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Research team. She is based in Singapore.
Katelyn Schoenholtz is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

References

1.
Anna Granskog, Oskar Lingqvist, and Daniel Nordigården, “Sustainability in packaging: Consumer Views in Emerging Asia,” McKinsey, March 8, 2021.
2.
Stephen Jones, “EY is paying for its 312,000 staff to take an MA in sustainability as part of wider efforts to help retain and attract staff,” Business Insider, February 24, 2022.
3.
RRA Proprietary Analysis.

A Look into Asia’s Sustainability Talent Market

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices