Redefine Performance by Reclaiming Balance | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Redefine Performance by Reclaiming Balance

Career AdviceLeadershipTeam Performance

Article

October 21, 2021

3 min

Career AdviceLeadershipTeam Performance

Executive Summary

No matter our position or what organization we work for, we are always more than our work.

Close

Do you get anxious about losing mobile service when you step onto an airplane? Or, find yourself peeking at your phone to check emails when you’re supposed to be spending quality time with family and friends? Do work demands come before your physical or mental health needs?

Even when we are purpose-driven and inspired by our work, continuous workplace stress can have detrimental effects on our life, professionally and personally. In a recent podcast episode of Redefiners, Russell Reynolds Associates CEO, Clarke Murphy and consultant Nanaz Mohtashami interviewed Annastiina Hintsa, the CEO of Hintsa Performance, on avoiding burnout and reaching new levels of success.

The following takeaways can help professionals reclaim work-life balance and redefine performance in today’s fast-paced business environment.

Embrace your holistic identity

We’re often presented with the question, “What do you do?” In most contexts, this really means, “What do you do for work?” Our career is an important part of our identity because it provides us with a livelihood and a sense of belonging. It can also offer a sense of purpose, especially when we are passionate about the work we do.

But passion need not always be about work; we can be passionate about hobbies, sports, art, literature, family, or social engagements, to name a few. No matter our position or what organization we work for, we are always more than our work. We do more than our jobs and our self-identity should reflect that.

Annastiina recalled that her orthopedic surgeon father, who founded Hintsa Performance, operated on one of the best long-distance runners of all time, Haile Gebrselassie when he was having problems with his Achilles tendon around the time of the 2004 Summer Olympics. Her father was nervous prior to the procedure but as they were entering the operating theater Haile said to him, “Doctor, chill out. It's just running.”

For Haile, running was his passion and what he loved to do. Even though he was an Olympian, running was not his whole life nor his entire identity. He was also a father, a businessman, a mentor, and a philanthropist. If Haile faced a setback, he had other legs to stand on that he could be passionate about. Just like holistic health can help a person find balance and achieve better performance, so does holistic identity. When we embrace our holistic self, we naturally strike a better work-life balance that honors our various identities.

Master the art of disconnecting

In today’s hyper-connected workplace, meetings can occur at any time of the day between people that are thousands of miles apart from each other in different time zones. Moreover, instantaneous responses have become the norm as platforms like WhatsApp, Teams, and Slack attach us to work – day in, day out.

Against these expectations, it’s difficult to juggle career, family, and wellbeing; all too often, the latter ranks last. Not only does this compromise personal priorities, but employees who constantly jump from one set of notifications to another inevitably experience downturns in productivity. Recent findings from Gallup suggest that employees are more stressed in 2021 than in 2020 and 2019. More surprisingly, the data suggest that time off may not be helping employees unwind and destress.

To counter the detriments of “always-on” corporate culture, we should explore ways to intentionally disconnect. For me, when I start my vacation – the day I actually shut off – I usually sleep for 12 hours straight. This helps me detach and clear the mental clutter.

But, shutting off can also happen on a daily basis. Annastiina reserves each morning for herself and has set a rule that she won’t begin her day by scrolling through her inbox or having a call first thing. Instead, her morning ritual includes personal activities that she enjoys such as running, yoga, or reading the newspaper.

Disconnecting might seem like a difficult thing to do at first. For starters, switching your phone to ‘airplane mode’ is a great step for temporarily putting notifications on pause. Other recommendations include setting notifications to turn off during off-hours, reducing or consolidating communication, and practicing separating work and life. For the last one, by never physically doing work and personal tasks simultaneously, we become better at mentally separating work and life, according to research published by Harvard Business Review.

Rewards await those who master the art of disconnecting. A study led by the University of York and the University of Florida suggests that more than 40% of our creative ideas develop when we are taking breaks or letting our minds wander. Furthermore, less working time doesn’t always equate to less productivity. A multi-year study from Iceland found that cutting employees’ hours without slashing their pay showed no negative impact on productivity.

Looking ahead: optimize rather than maximize

In the business world, there are two personality growth types. The maximizer prioritizes raw returns, seeking maximum revenues and profits. The optimizer looks at results relative to the required investment. While the maximizer has long enjoyed attention from investors and stakeholders for obvious reasons, the optimizer has received the spotlight in recent years because they offer a more sustainable, long-term approach to growth.

I was interested to learn that Hintsa Performance operates on a model called the Circle of Life, which it first developed for athletes and later adapted for professionals and business organizations. The circle is comprised of six interconnected elements: physical activity, nutrition, sleep/recovery, biomechanics, mental energy, and general health. Because the six elements are all linked, we cannot try to maximize just one or two of them. Instead, the optimization formula is based on multiplication so if one factor is at a zero, the circle collapses.

At the core of the circle of life are three basic questions: Do you know who you are? Do you know what you want? Are you in control of your life? Exploring these three core questions can help people identify who and what matters to them, where they want to go, and how they can achieve it. If someone feels like a passenger in their life, this model helps put them back in the driver’s seat. These questions also redefine how we view performance and success.

Many of us try to maximize every single area of our lives. We want to be the perfect employee, the perfect mother, the perfect spouse, etc. Rather than push to the limit in one area to reach a finite goal, we can instead optimize across the many areas that matter to us and comprise our holistic identity. In the long-term, this allows us to expand our goals, redefine performance and implement the necessary changes — throughout our personal and professional lives.

Want more? Listen to Annastiina’s episode here.

Author

Amy Scissons, Chief Marketing and Communications Officer of Russell Reynolds Associates

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices