Focusing on the Future: How Gold Medal Boards Prioritize Their Time | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Focusing on the Future: How Gold Medal Boards Prioritize Their Time

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

+ 2 authors

April 29, 2022

7 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

The 2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study explore multiple aspects of director and leadership behaviors and board agendas.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Rich Fields

Boston

Laura Sanderson

London

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Munich

Marc Sanglé-Ferrière

Paris

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

RRA 2022 GLOBAL BOARD CULTURE AND DIRECTORS BEHAVIORS STUDY

Download the PDF version

Every three years, Russell Reynolds Associates surveys a global group of board directors, asking them about their board, their fellow directors, how they spend their time, and what topics they focus on the most. This year, over 1,100 directors participated. Russell Reynolds uses the information they provide us in our work assessing directors, recruiting and evaluating board leaders, and as part of our board effectiveness and advisory work.

The 2022 survey data was particularly rich, and Russell Reynolds Associates will be publishing a series of reports throughout this year looking at high performing director and board leader behaviors, the attributes of high performing boards, sustainability, inclusion, and other topics. This series will help directors around the world understand the latest trends and insights in each of these areas, and learn what they can do to enhance their own board performance and effectiveness.

Consciously or unconsciously, every board independently decides where it is going to focus its attention and efforts.

We asked directors to reflect on their board agenda over the past 12 months and identify the top three areas where their full board has spent the most time, and we then ranked those items based on how frequently they end up in a top-three list. There was substantial movement between 2019 and 2022 – no surprise, given the significant upheaval and challenges companies faced in 2020 and 2021. But there were also differences between how typical boards spend their time and how Gold Medal Boards (boards whose directors rate their board effectiveness as a 9 or 10 on a 1-10 point scale, and report the company as having outperformed relevant TSR benchmarks for two or more consecutive years) spend their time, as shown in the visual below.

As we wrote in Harvard Business Review in 2020, “Reviewing financial statements, audit activities, and compliance activities are the responsibility of the board, not the mission of the board. The most successful boards not only know this, but they craft their work and interactions to reflect it.”1 How boards prioritize topics and structure their agendas to focus on future focused, strategic topics is critical.  We saw that when we looked at how Gold Medal Boards focus their time in 2019, and we see it again in 2022.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Directors were asked the top three areas where their full board has spent the most time over the past 12 months; answers are ranked by frequency of selection. N=1,036. 2022.

Amid a global pandemic, economic turbulence, and societal upheaval, Gold Medal Boards continued to stay focused on value-creating work: strategic planning, operational performance, M&A, and capital allocation. COVID-19 response was on the agenda, too – no surprise – but ranked below M&A. Why? Gold Medal Boards know that challenging times create opportunities to acquire weaker competitors, complementary firms, or key partners who have run into trouble and are looking for an exit.

Gold Medal Boards also were more likely than typical boards to focus on succession planning for both CEOs and board members in 2021. It looks like those efforts paid off:

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Percentage of directors saying yes to the statements. N=975. 2022.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Percentage of directors saying yes to the statement. N=975. 2022.

From Insight to Action

Board leaders and board members collectively need to ensure that their board stays focused on what matters most:

Forward-focused and value-creating agendas: Too many boards focus on backwards-looking compliance and review activities at the expense of forward-focused, value-creating efforts. Reviewing financial statements and audit activities are important and must be done well, but setting strategy, overseeing operational excellence, making sure M&A is strategic and successful, and similar activities all help create the future and create value. Boards need to step back, readjust their agenda, and reallocate their time.

Driven to perform: It is almost impossible for board leaders to improve the quality of their board if they do not have the data necessary to measure and assess performance. The best boards know this – that is why they are more likely to do full board as well as individual director review activities and give performance feedback to directors. Clear, concise, evidence-based performance data is the foundation for improving individual director – and ultimately, the full board’s – performance.

Successful succession events: CEO succession is one of the most important activities a board will ever undertake. Too many CEO searches are done at the last minute and fail to create lasting value for the business or shareholders. Boards need to make sure long term CEO succession planning is a constant undertaking, high on the boardroom agenda, that the board always has ideas regarding potential succession candidates and that, if a succession had to take place tomorrow, they are confident that an extremely effective candidate would be appointed to the role.

Methodology

Over 1,100 supervisory board-level directors from more than 41 countries participated in the Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey, with 55 percent of respondents based in Europe, 27 percent in the Americas, 12 percent in Oceana, 3 percent in Asia, 2 percent in Africa, and 1 percent in the Middle East. Industries represented included financial services (26 percent of respondents), industrial and natural resources (22 percent), consumer (11 percent), technology (11 percent), healthcare (10 percent), and professional and business services (6 percent). Forty-four percent of respondents’ companies had annual revenue over $1 billion.

Download the PDF version

Authors

Rusty O’Kelley co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas.  He is based in Stamford.
Rich Fields leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board Effectiveness practice.  He is based in Boston.
Laura Sanderson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe.  She is based in London.
Jens-Thomas Pietralla leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources practice, and co-leads the firm’s Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe. He is based in Munich.
Marc Sangle-Ferriere co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe.  He is based in Paris.
Alvin Chiang is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners.  He is based in Singapore.
PJ Neal is the global head of knowledge and operations for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners.  He is based in Boston.
Elena Loridas is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners Knowledge Management team. She is based in Chicago.

2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study

Explore full paper series

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices