Who knows whether business is delivering on science-based targets? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Who knows whether business is delivering on science-based targets?

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipSocial ImpactSustainability Officers

Article

May 11, 2022

3 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipSocial ImpactSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

Highlights from our breakfast discussion on getting to Net Zero targets, in partnership with Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Mike Hugman.

Close

Russell Reynolds Associates and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation hosted a breakfast discussion with Mike Hugman, Director of Climate Finance at Children’s Investment Fund Foundation. Attendees included senior corporate leaders, investors, and philanthropic funders.

Mike kicked off discussion on the topic of how real progress could be made on getting to Net Zero targets. There was lively debate on how business, investment, and social impact organisations should work together in pressing for policy and regulatory change. The intention is to feed these inputs into the way CIFF and other philanthropies think about their strategies for achieving Net Zero.

You can listen to the highlights here:

1. Measurement of climate action plans

There is still a multiplicity of different frameworks for companies to report on climate disclosures, and an agreed international framework is still some years away. Accounting standards took 300 years to develop; the global community is now trying to agree on a non-financial reporting framework in the space of five years.

The consequence is a nervousness among corporates and a fear that minor inaccuracies in reporting will disproportionately undermine their credibility and status. This is delaying and distracting, and also inhibits corporations from taking action, innovating, and reporting transparently. With so much focus on publicly listed business, who is scrutinizing privately held competitors?

To reach Net Zero emissions by 2050, annual clean energy investment worldwide will need to more than triple by 2030 to around $4 trillion. The “missing” investment is needed in emerging markets. Investment there is currently inhibited by underdeveloped local capital markets, even in middle-income countries, where the cost of capital continues to deter would-be investors. In lower-income countries, the limiting factor is lack of demand for low cardon products.

Therefore, what is needed in the short- to medium-term is a pragmatic approach to reporting. There should be some latitude not to escape real change, but because overly stringent reporting is counter-productive.

2. Engagement and partnerships to improve plans and ensure accountability

Super-charged sector-specific initiatives are needed to ensure accountability of climate action plans. Philanthropic organisations can play a crucial, catalytic, role in this space, by carrying the financial and political risk that governments and corporations are not willing or able to take. They can also act as brokers between commercial competitors.

Philanthropies such as CIFF can enhance their system-level impact by effectively connecting the initiatives they are supporting, such as projects on carbon disclosure, climate finance, and work with hard-to-abate industries.

Philanthropic actors need to improve on communicating the rationale behind their initiatives and stay connected to one another. Perversely, some civil society groups may slow down the transition, by closing the space for innovation and by criticising imperfect action.

3. Policy, including positive lobbying, to secure the regulation needed

There are different roles for different capital pools. Philanthropies, for example, are more able to focus on the longer-term, riskier innovations.

The PDP model may be one to draw upon, as a successful format for convening the finance, corporations, expertise, and policy focus required to move the needle. There is a role for engaged philanthropies as the guarantor of these sectoral initiatives. They are able to incentivize collaboration between competitors, and reach policymakers with positive advocacy, as opposed to lobbying.

Philanthropies could be more explicit about the policy changes they want to see and advocate, where appropriate, with responsible competitors.

With thanks to the attendance and insightful contributions of:

Carmel McQuaid, Marks and Spencer| Head of Sustainable Business

Emma Howard Boyd, Environment Agency | Chair

Elsa Palanza, Barclays Bank PLC | Managing Director, Global Head of Sustainability and ESG

Gillian Karran-Cumberlege, Fidelio Partners, Head of Chair & Board Practice/Chapter Zero, Board & Steering Committee Member

Harry Boyd-Carpenter, European Bank for Reconstruction & Development (EBRD) | Managing Director, Green Economy and Climate Action

Ian Cheshire, Menhaden Capital Plc/Spire Healthcare| Chair

Joseph Mares, Trium Capital | Portfolio Manager, ESG Emissions Impact Fund

Marika McCauley Sine, Mars, Incorporated | Global Vice President of Sustainability

Mike Hugman, Children's Investment Fund Foundation | Director, Climate Finance

Patricia Atkinson, Impetus | Managing Director

Quintin Price, Liontrust Asset Management PLC| Non-Executive Director

Rosie Donachie, Crypto.com | Head of Environmental Social and Governance, Senior Vice President

Sally Bridgeland, Impax Asset Management Group plc | Chair

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices