Sustainability Transformation Takes Courage. We Need Brave Leaders to Step Up | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Sustainability Transformation Takes Courage. We Need Brave Leaders to Step Up.

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipSustainability OfficersDevelopment and Transition

Article

Clarke Murphy

October 22, 2021

3 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipSustainability OfficersDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We may have distinct business challenges and goals, but the rallying cry is that we all have the desire to unify to create a sustainable agenda.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

Over the past few weeks, I have had the incredible opportunity to participate in and speak at the United Nation Global Compact’s Uniting Business Live event and the World Economic Forum’s Sustainable Development Impact Summit. I was fortunate enough to hear some of the world’s most visionary thinkers share their insights on pressing issues facing our world—equity, governance and sustainability. The energy, enthusiasm and passion were palatable. Perhaps one of the most fulfilling aspects of the conversations was that we all learned a lot together, by sharing solutions, not just problems.

As I reflect on these conversations, I am moved by the power of unity. We may have distinct business challenges and goals, but the rallying cry was undeniable, we all have the desire to unify business around issues that matter to create a sustainable agenda for the world. Here are some of my biggest takeaways.

Change Leaders Will Drive Sustainability Transformation

I have said for some time that the transition to sustainable business starts at the top. What the world needs now is leaders who have the will to push companies forward to genuinely make a difference. Those who approach issues with a sustainable mindset, take ownership and hold teams accountable will move the ball forward the fastest—and make the biggest impact.

That message is taking hold. In just one year, the uptick we have seen in our clients asking for us to include sustainable competencies in executive searches is remarkable. Just four years ago, only 4% of the roles we searched for required us to look at sustainable competences. That number is now 40%. The shift is happening. Investors are voting. Boards are listening. Employees are demanding action.

When and How to Start

Our recent Divides and Dividends report shed light on the road ahead. We learned that just over 40% of C-suite executives said their organization has a sustainability strategy that has been acted on and clearly communicated.

We know that one of the biggest challenges to getting started on sustainability is knowing where and how to jump in. My advice is to engage, experiment, innovate, push and listen. The untapped energy that will no doubt arise will be inspiring and create momentum. Do not go for homeruns; go for singles and doubles. Do not let the process be paralyzing.

Some of the fastest progress we have seen occurs when incentives tied to sustainability are built into the reward and measurement system, and when employees have development opportunities around sustainability. Set audacious goals, rigorously drive action, focus on long term activation, and stay committed. Benchmark current performance and set realistic targets for improvement.

But perhaps the biggest piece of advice I have is to be brave. Leaders must not be afraid to talk about planet, profit and people. These are some of the most urgent, deeply personal and significant issues of our time. Change will take courage.

Culture and Collaboration

When sustainability is embedded wholistically into a company’s DNA, the wheels of change really start to turn. This is a way to pull everyone together, to create purpose, belief and to keep people invested in the journey. A culture that is grounded in mission-driven collaboration creates cohesion and fosters pride.

Creating forums for consistent and meaningful engagement with stakeholders to open a candid feedback loop is key to instilling this sense of pride. This might take the form of employee townhalls, anonymous feedback mechanisms, investor engagement, roundtable discussions, focus groups or something else, but finding the right levers to pull will be critical for the future.

There is an unprecedented opportunity and a duty to guide organizations and the wider community of stakeholders towards a vision of the future that is more hopeful, sustainable, equitable and resilient.

Taking time to reflect affords us the important opportunity to regroup and refocus, but we must not look back for too long. We must focus on the road ahead and the best way to get there. I hope you will join me on this journey.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices