Black History is Me, a Black Man from Iowa | Russel Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Black History is Me, a Black Man from Iowa

InclusionInclusion and Culture

Article

Evan C. Sharp

February 04, 2022

3 min

InclusionInclusion and Culture

Close

Evan C. Sharp

Chicago

This Black History Month, I have no stats. I have no research or data to share. If you follow me on IG, you will probably see some posts highlighting Black figures. But I have no revelations or grand statements that may cut through what I hope to be the robust celebrations and observances you might come across. What I have is me – a Black boy from Iowa.

Coincidentally, over the last week as we approached February and Black History Month, I received a package from a high school friend. Curiously, I opened it up and pulled out the book in the picture, entitled “Studies in Iowa History – The Negro in Iowa” by Leola Nelson Bergmann and published by The State Historical Society of Iowa. Imagine. This friend, a white male with whom I have had several conversations about growing up Black in Iowa, came across it in a half-priced bookstore and thought I would appreciate it.

At first, I was puzzled. But then I understood. He thought I might find some value in exploring this history. A piece of my history as a Black Iowan. Well, he assumed right. As I get older (I can feel several friends and colleagues side-eyeing me now!) I appreciate history more – its lessons, its power, its ability to help us change the future if we are willing to dig deep and learn and commit.

As I cracked open the book, inhaled the scent of its age, and laid my eyes on the pages, my mind raced:

Black boy from Iowa grows up never thinking about life outside the state, but works hard in school, is mediocre in sports, and earns his way into Washington University in St. Louis.

Black boy from Iowa gets an internship at Goldman Sachs, less than one year after learning what an investment bank is and toughs it out in New York City.

Black boy from Iowa grows immensely through friendships and relationships and Wall Street mayhem, then pursues his MBA because “all the senior people have them.”

Black boy from Iowa meets his future wife (from Dallas) in NYC as well – who would have thought?

Black boy from Iowa goes into consulting at Accenture and – while my swag might have been increasing – is still figuring it all out…but family and friends point him to the world of executive recruiting and leadership advisory work.

Black man from Iowa today does what he never knew he would love so much – helping organizations find leaders that will change the trajectory of their businesses and helping people pursue professional and personal dreams with a great firm, Russell Reynolds Associates.

Black man from Iowa has found a career that he can be proud of, a career that he can share with his growing family, his parents, his sister, and loved ones.

Am I special? Not any more special than any of you. Am I black history? Yes, even if just a microcosm.

I pray that as we all celebrate Black History Month, we dive in with the fervor, curiosity, open-mindedness, and willingness to learn that we all had when we were kids. Challenge your own assumptions just like you challenged your parents. Seek out information like you’re on a scavenger hunt with your school friends. Study the diaspora as if your semester grade depended on it. Stumble into some facts and figures like you stumbled into your first middle or high school dance. Make it an adventure, make it a journey.

Make Black History as much a part of your life as any history. Make Black History YOUR history. I promise you – you have everything to gain.

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

Board and CEO AdvisoryInclusion and Culture

Why It’s Important Organizations Recognize Women CEOs as Innovators

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices