CEO Succession: Exploding Five Myths | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CEO Succession: Exploding Five Myths

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHealthcareCEO SuccessionBoard Effectiveness

Article

May 02, 2022

5 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHealthcareCEO SuccessionBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

RRA identified the five most common myths related to leadership development and succession that have a hold over boardroom discussions and C-suite engagement.

Close

Ernie Brittingham

New York

Sarah Eames

New York

The State of CEO Succession Planning

Leadership is the lifeblood of all organizations. There is no more important
pathway to successful leadership development than succession planning.
Although the stakes are immeasurably high, succession planning is still an
undervalued corporate agenda item.

Which begs the question: ‘Why?’ Top performing organizations understand that
succession planning is a key pillar of corporate performance that transcends
short term emergency planning scenarios. According to the National Association
of Corporate Directors, 57% of public company directors report the need for
improvement in CEO succession planning. However, many CEOs and boards
are skeptical. Moreover, there are widespread myths about proactive, high-functioning CEO succession.

Russell Reynolds Associates spoke with board directors, CEOs, and CHROs
from over 100 leading companies to better understand the current state of CEO
succession planning. While there was huge variability in companies’ approach to
CEO succession, we identified the five most common myths related to leadership
development and succession that have a considerable hold over boardroom
discussions and C-suite engagement:

Myth 01: CEO succession plans are an off-the-shelf solution, not multi-year leadership development

Myth 02: The best future CEO looks like the current CEO

Myth 03: CEO succession is not intertwined with leadership development

Myth 04: Once the CEO is identified, the board’s role is done

Myth 05: The board is fully aligned on future corporate strategy

By acknowledging and avoiding these pitfalls, boards and leadership teams can overcome historical barriers to successful CEO succession.

Myth 01 | CEO succession plans are an off-the-shelf solution, not multi-year leadership development

Reality | CEO succession is core to retaining and attracting best-in-class talent

Too often, CEOs believe boards will be distracted by putting an artificial CEO succession process in place. Or worse, they
suppose CEO succession is equivalent to setting the departure date for the current CEO.

In reality, a genuine succession process retains and develops the best and brightest talent, creating high-functioning
C-suite leadership teams.

Equally important, succession planning is the best way to align enterprise value creation with leadership talents. To
optimize performance today, great organizations focus on CEO succession, whereas underperforming companies defer the
inevitable into the future.

To be effective, CEO succession needs to focus on achieving the forward-thinking enterprise strategy, not the business
realities of today, or even yesterday. By developing internal talent through assessment, coaching, and rotational
opportunities, stress testing the strategy for the future, corporations can de-risk their CEO transitions. Using the future
lens, companies often need to look deeper in the organization, or potentially outside, to begin developing future CEOs.

“... we’ve seen flawed succession
practices lead to excessive turnover
among senior executives and, in the
end, significant value destruction for
companies and investment portfolios.”

Source: Harvard Business Review2

Myth 02 | The best future CEO looks like the current CEO

Reality | Attempting to clone the current CEO can hinder the future success of the organization. The next CEO will require different capabilities to achieve the future strategy

The future requires a leader with the skills and capabilities
to lead in a dynamic, changing market. A successful CEO
may have shepherded the company to today’s destination;
however, casting that image for the future is looking
retrospectively, not prospectively. The successor CEO must
address the future, not the past.

Mistakes inherent to this perspective include:

Placing a premium on past, not future, CEO performance.

Narrowly defining the CEO profile.

Neglecting to evolve beyond a hero culture or legendary
leader.

In addition, we found that the success profile for future
CEOs often hinges on the current CEO’s performance. In
other words, if the company is performing well, boards tend
to look for the same type of leader, whereas if the company
is underperforming the market, boards swing the pendulum
far from the current profile.

It is critical for boards to define the ideal profile with
future market challenges and opportunities in mind, while
also balancing the needs of employees and shareholders.
Boards need to boldly embrace the CEOs of tomorrow,
creating more opportunities for diversity.

Myth 03 | CEO succession is not intertwined with leadership development

Reality | Leadership development is core to CEO succession; the two are inextricably intertwined

Companies need to place a high priority on leadership
development to optimize current performance, as well as
prepare for long-term CEO succession. This topic is often
considered taboo, as it is falsely correlated with setting
unrealistic timetables for the organization or the leadership
team.

On the contrary, intense long-term leadership development
is, at its core, the best preparation for future leadership
roles. In fact, 70% of CEO searches select an internal
candidate, so ensuring that the internal leadership team is
well-prepared is crucial.

70% of CEO searches land on an internal candidate*

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates3
*The internal candidate was not the first choice in all such cases.

Key questions to consider when thinking about executive leadership development:

Is there an assessment program to identify high potential
executives?

Is it yielding a return on investment?

Is the organization reaching multiple levels down into the
organization to fast-track diverse executives for senior
roles within the next five years?

Are the most senior leaders getting the necessary cross-functional, cross-business unit experience and exposure
to the board of directors?

Myth 04 | Once the CEO is identified, the board’s role is done

Reality | A disproportionate number of new CEOs fail during their first 18 months at the helm

Prior research by Russell Reynolds shows that, on average,
13.1% of new CEOs leave in under three years in the S&P
500. Given the cost and investment in CEO appointments,
these are expensive misses. When looking at just external
CEO appointments, the numbers jump to a 17.2 percent
departure rate in three years—a notable rate of failure.

Research completed by Harvard Business Review and
Corporate Executive Board point to a disproportionately
high failure rate for new leaders; 50% to 70% of executives
fail within 18 months of taking on a role, regardless of
whether they were an external hire or promoted from
within.5 In addition, two out of five new CEOs fail in their
first 18 months on the job.6

Both research studies highlight the importance of transition
plans and onboarding, regardless of whether the hire is an
internal promotion or an external appointment, as well as
the importance of leadership development among internal
candidates, given their increased success rate.

It is critical that the board designs a transition plan to
successfully support CEO onboarding, including providing
an in-depth cultural orientation, executive coaching, board
orientation, and team building activities.

There are short-term and long-term transition activities
that can pay outsized dividends and accelerate CEO impact,
including:

Establishing an effective relationship with the board and
executive leadership team.

Translating the culture of the organization for the
onboarding CEO.

Understanding the strengths and development areas for
the new CEO related to their leadership style.

Setting clear expectations for performance over the first
year, two years, and five years.

Establishing a coach for the CEO.

13.1% of new CEOs leave in less than three years. When looking at external appointments, this jumped to 17.2%.
Source: Russell Reynolds Associates4

49% of companies that improved their performance during the pandemic increased their time spent with executive coaches vs. 26% of organizations that did not improve their performance over the same time frame.7

Myth 05 | The board and leadership team are fully aligned on future corporate strategy

Reality | Boards and executive leadership teams are often not aligned on strategy, nor do they have access to the capital and human resources required to achieve enterprise success and mitigate risk

The global economy was not prepared for the pandemic.
That said, its impact was not unique. For decades, Black
Swan events have created economic and geopolitical
turmoil within major industry sectors, in turn disrupting
company growth, innovation, and transformation.

Given these unpredictable periods in the corporate lifecycle
of all companies, boards and leadership teams need to
be aligned on the corporate strategy to support next
generation leadership development and long-term CEO
succession. This translates into creating high-functioning
teams, a competitive advantage that supports sustainability,
inclusivity, and innovation.

Conclusion

The most critical shortcomings in CEO succession approaches hinge on five key myths that need to be deconstructed for companies to move forward with effective succession management.

Russell Reynolds compiled a checklist around these key myths that organizations can use to help deconstruct them:

Myth #1: CEO succession plans are an off-the-shelf solution not multi-year leadership development.

Reality: CEO succession is core to retaining and attracting best-in-class talent.

Where is the organization in the succession planning life
cycle?

What is the state of the company’s emergency plans?

Is the organization actively viewing CEO succession as
a business capability? How is the organization defining
this?

Who are the key stakeholders in this business capability?
How do they work together? How are they accountable to
each other?

Myth #2: The best future CEO looks like the current CEO

Reality: Attempting to clone the current CEO can hinder the future success of the organization. The next CEO will require different capabilities to achieve the future strategy.

Is the organization pushing back on stakeholders who are
looking to install a successor similar to the current CEO?

Is the company overvaluing prior CEO experience?

Is the depth and complexity of the evolution of the CEO’s
role being considered when defining the future CEO’s
profile?

Is the company taking tangible, active steps toward
building a more inclusive C-suite?

Myth #3: CEO succession is not intertwined with leadership development.

Reality: Leadership development is core to CEO succession; the two are inextricably intertwined.

Is the organization reaching multiple
levels down to identify those who
might be fast-tracked for senior roles
within the next five years?

Is the company using its leadership
bench to feed both emergency and
longer-term succession plans?

Is the organization focusing on the
role current leaders can play in
helping forge future strategies?

Are the most senior leaders getting
the necessary cross-functional,
cross-business unit experience?

Myth #4: Once the new CEO is in the seat, the hard part is done

Reality: A disproportionate number of new CEOs fail during their first 18 months at the helm.

Is the organization providing focused
attention to ensure successful
onboarding and transition of the new
CEO?

Is the CEO transition owned by
the board? Who are the other key
stakeholders?

What scenarios would trigger
‘interventions’ at the board level, and
what would those interventions look
like?

What tangible benchmarks is the
company looking for at the end of
the first 90 days, year, two years?

Myth #5: The board and leadership team are fully aligned on future corporate strategy.

Reality: Boards and executive leadership teams are often not aligned on strategy, nor do they have access to the capital and human resources required to achieve enterprise success and mitigate risk.

To what extent has the company’s
strategy altered across the last two
years?

What are the key strategic priorities
for the organization to achieve?

Is the organization taking stock of
contributions and viewpoints from
rising senior leaders?

What is the nature of transformation
required for the company to achieve
its strategic priorities?

Is the company actively training
its next-generation leaders to deal
with multiple simultaneous ‘stacked’
crises?

Authors

Ernie Brittingham leads the firm’s global healthcare industry. He is also a
member of the board & CEO advisory partners and private equity groups. Ernie is
based in New York.
Sarah Eames leads the firm’s global healthcare services practice. She is also a
member of the board & CEO advisory partners and private equity groups. Sarah
is based in New York.
Olivia Floto leads strategic insight generation for the firm’s global healthcare
services practice. Olivia is based in Chicago.
Sarah Flören leads strategic insight generation for the firm’s global healthcare
industry. Sarah is based in Amsterdam.

References

1. ‘2019-2020 NACD Public Company Governance Survey’,
National Association of Corporate Directors
2. ‘The High Cost of Poor Succession Planning,’ Harvard Business Review
3. ‘Keeping An Open Mind: Why An Unconventional Candidate Could
Be The Right CEO Successor’, Russell Reynolds Associates
4. ‘CEO Transitions: Mitigating Risks and Accelerating
Value Creation’, Russell Reynolds Associates
5. ‘4 Common Reasons Half of All New Executives Fail’, Business
Insider reporting on Corporate Executive Board research
6. ‘Ending the CEO Succession Crisis’, Harvard Business Review
7. ‘Return as a muscle: How lessons from COVID19 can shape a
robust operating model for hybrid and beyond’, McKinsey

CEO Succession: Exploding Five Myths

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices