CEOs Need to Develop a More Sophisticated Understanding of Sustainability | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CEOs Need to Develop a More Sophisticated Understanding of Sustainability

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

Article

Kurt Harrison

March 24, 2022

6 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

The simultaneous global crises of climate change, global pandemics, geopolitics and racial and social injustices continue to wreak havoc on the business landscape. Events like these are a stark reminder of just how much work we must do to build a better, more resilient planet for all.

Leaders today have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to pivot their businesses to a more sustainable future. This isn’t just about making net-zero promises. While environmental goals are an important part of the story, they are not the whole story, because sustainable business spans the full range of the U.N.’s Sustainable Development Goals, covering everything from inclusive leadership and health to economic growth and addressing poverty.

We now have clear data to show that thinking about both shareholders and stakeholders are not opposing goals. In fact, sustainability action unlocks sizable business opportunities.

Recent research found that taking societal impact into account when setting business strategy spurs innovation and helps companies identify new products, services and business models. According to another survey, millennials are 5.3 times more likely to stay with an employer when they have a strong connection to their employer’s purpose. And sustainability is becoming an increasingly influential factor in corporate investment. For example, The CFA Institute found that 75% of investment leaders expect ESG factors to become more influential.

The Risks of Doing Nothing Are Significant

Organizations lacking a stated and credible commitment to sustainability will lose market share, talent, and brand identity to their competitors. Revenues will fall, expenses will rise and shareholders will eventually revolt.

Against this backdrop, Russell Reynolds Associates set out to understand the real state of sustainability within organizations across 11 countries. By surveying three distinct groups — C-suite executives, next-generation leaders and employees — we were able to understand what a cross-section of the global workforce thinks about the maturity of their organization’s sustainability strategy and the ability of their leaders to advance the sustainability agenda.

We found that U.S. C-suite respondents are bullish about sustainability progress at their organizations: 49% say they have a sustainability strategy in place that has been acted upon and clearly communicated, while 69% say their CEO is personally committed to advancing sustainability and organizational progress has been made.

Understanding the Value Is Just Beginning

Yet there are also indications that business leaders are at the early stages of their understanding of the value that sustainability can unlock — both for their organizations and the communities in which they operate. For example, when asked about the driving force behind their sustainability actions, 46% of U.S. C-suite leaders cited brand management concerns — they wanted to be seen as socially responsible or reputable and use sustainability for competitive differentiation. By comparison, just 18% say value creation sets the agenda.

A brand-first approach is problematic because it is unlikely to lead to the transformation that is required to thrive in a new era of stakeholder capitalism. Our research demonstrates what is at stake: 54% of C-suite leaders who say value creation is the driving force of sustainability strategy expect their company to make good progress in the next five years, compared to just 36% of those who say brand management is the driving force behind their sustainability efforts.

There is a significant opportunity for leaders to challenge prevailing assumptions about the value of sustainability to their business. Those that see it as a core growth driver, rather than a threat to be managed, will go much further, much faster in the years ahead.

The Need for Empathy From Leaders

Sustainability can feel like an abstract concept. To really commit, people need to be able to “touch and feel” it. Building a culture of sustainability and galvanizing the entire organization behind the shift to sustainable business will ultimately require a different set of leadership skills than in the past, with softer skills like empathy, authenticity and self-awareness becoming ever-more important.

Unfortunately, our research indicates that many leaders lack many of these capabilities.

Only a quarter of employees believe their most senior leaders demonstrate humility or self-awareness. And only a third believe senior leaders display empathy, humanity and inclusivity. This view is not just held by frontline employees — even C-suite executives do not see these attributes in their senior leaders.

We cannot keep doing the same thing and expect different results.

For the U.S. to drive progress toward sustainable business at the scale and pace we need, organizations must elevate sustainability to an executive responsibility. CEO and board leaders need to make sustainability a fundamental strand of business strategy and spearhead radical, enterprise-wide transformation.

The New Mindset of Leadership

At Russell Reynolds, we believe there are three critical actions CEOs can take to deliver this make-or-break transition.

Who is on your leadership team and how that leadership team operates together has the potential to enable or torpedo your organization’s progress on sustainability. But what skills should you be looking for?

In 2020, we worked with the United Nations Global Compact to create a first-of-its-kind blueprint for Sustainable Leadership, defining the specific competencies that leaders must possess to deliver sustainability results. Our model was based on a real-world analysis of 55 sustainable leaders who are already delivering sustainability outcomes for their organization, alongside financial success.

Sustainable mindset: Possesses a deeply rooted belief that business is not a commercial activity divorced from the wider societal and environmental context in which it operates.

Multi-level systems thinking: Understands how their organization interplays with the larger business, societal and environmental systems that surround it.

Stakeholder inclusion: Actively seeks to understand a wide range of viewpoints and makes decisions with all stakeholders in mind.

Disruptive innovation: Challenges traditional approaches and asks: Why can’t it be done differently? Able to cut through bureaucracy to find novel solutions.

Long-term activation: Sets clear stretch goals. Stays the course in the face of setbacks and possesses the courage to make decisions that may be unpopular with some stakeholders.

Sustainability is a complex space; it covers an array of environmental, economic and social issues, as well as a large web of stakeholders, from investors, regulators and customers to employees. This makes setting and defining a clear strategy a difficult undertaking.

A good place to start is to orientate your sustainability strategy around your company’s core business and areas of competitive advantage. Your board has an important role to play here. Once in place, you need to translate your sustainability goals into concrete actions and measurable objectives that leaders and employees can feel in their day-to-day work.

Communicate and Build Employee Engagement

Sustainability goals will be harder to achieve when workforces are not engaged. To make progress, it is good practice to treat employee engagement as a strategic imperative.

Go beyond typical engagement surveys and use advanced culture analytics tools to get a deep scan of how connected employees really are to your organizational purpose and sustainability strategy and whether the right behaviors and values are manifesting. And don’t forget to tap into employees to drive innovation. Your frontline is often a critical source of creativity and inspiration for sustainable business practices.

This article first appeared on BRINK.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices