What Your Board Needs to Know About Nasdaq’s Rule Change on Diversity Disclosure | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Your Board Needs to Know About Nasdaq’s Rule Change on Diversity Disclosure

Leadership StrategiesInclusionLeadershipCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchInclusion and Culture

Article

August 11, 2021

3 min

Leadership StrategiesInclusionLeadershipCulture RiskBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

Nasdaq recently won Securities and Exchange Commission approval to implement rule changes for listed companies.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Rich Fields

Boston

On Friday, Nasdaq won Securities and Exchange Commission approval to implement rule changes for listed companies,1 requiring increased disclosure around board diversity. The likely result of this will be a growing competition for directors who are women, racial and ethnic minorities, or identify as LGBTQ+.

While it is possible that the rule implementation will be delayed pending legal challenges, there is clearly a growing emphasis around increasing diversity and disclosure in the boardroom – and a long way for boards to go to meet minimum standards: according to a Nasdaq analysis conducted in 2020, over 75 percent of boards would not have met the proposed new standards had they been implemented at that time. According to ISS data on 2,284 boards, over a third of Nasdaq listed companies lack a racially diverse director and more than 10 percent lack female directors.

The rule requires most listed boards to:

Disclose board-level diversity data annually, following Nasdaq’s Board Diversity Matrix, or a substantially similar format. The disclosure will be made via the company’s proxy statement, information statement, 10-K or 20-F, or on the company’s website.

Have at least two diverse directors, including one who self-identifies as female and one who self-identifies as either an underrepresented minority or LGBTQ+. Companies which do not meet this standard may provide an explanation for why not, as well as a description of a different approach to diversity that they are implementing.

There is a transition period for companies to meet the standard:

Nasdaq Global Select Market and Nasdaq Global Market companies will have to have, or explain why they do not have, one diverse director (per the above standard) no later than two years after the SEC approval date. They will have to do the same thing for two diverse directors no later than four years after the approval date.

Nasdaq Capital Market companies will have to have, or explain why they do not have, one diverse director (per the above standard) no later than two years after the SEC approval date. They will have to do the same thing for two diverse directors no later than five years after the approval date.

Companies with boards of five or fewer directors will have to have, or explain why they do not have, one diverse director (per the above standard) no later than two years after the SEC approval date.

We recently published an article in Directors and Boards discussing a modern approach to recruiting diverse board candidates.2 In that article we stated:

To increase the diversity of their boards, companies must change how they recruit diverse talent. Too many boards think they can complete a search for a diverse director in under three months, failing to recognize how in-demand diverse executives are and how complex a well-designed process can be to do well. Boards should instead develop a three- to five-year succession plan, so they have a long-term view of the strategy-driven skills and experiences new directors need.

Boards then need to identify pools of diverse talent, which will likely be different from where and how the board has recruited in the past. Part of this should include building relationships with diverse executives before they become attractive director candidates, creating a pipeline to board service, and a network of up-and-coming diverse leaders.

Ensure that diverse candidates are getting an opportunity to interview and that diverse stakeholders are included in the interview process. The NYC comptroller advocates for a version of the NFL’s Rooney Rule, encouraging boards to consider at least a minimum number of qualified people of color for every open board seat.

There is growing pressure on companies to continue making progress on inclusive leadership— and that pressure is not likely to lessen anytime soon.

Russell Reynolds Associates is proud of our 50 year history of supporting diversity, equity, and inclusion on corporate boards. In 2020, over 30 percent of the board directors we placed were racial and ethnic minorities, and nearly 50 percent were women. Our firm co-founded and has co-led the Black Corporate Directors Conference for over 20 years, founded the Hispanic Directors Network, was an original supporter of the 30% Club, and is a long-term sponsor of HIMFORHER and the Latino Corporate Director Association.

Additional Authors

PJ Neal is a Thought Leadership Architect and Lead. He is based in Boston.

1. “Nasdaq’s Board Diversity Rule: What Nasdaq-Listed Companies Should Know”, Nasdaq, October 1, 2021.
2. Rusty O’Kelley, “A Modern Approach to Recruiting Diverse Board Candidates”, Directors & Boards, July 2021.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices