The Power of a Challenger Mindset | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

the-power-of-a-challenger-mindset

The Power of a Challenger Mindset

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Article

Constantine Alexandrakis

December 10, 2021

4 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Executive Summary

Falling on old paradigms and institutional platitudes will not open doors to new ways of thinking.

Close

Constantine Alexandrakis

Chicago

Ever since my first day as a management consultant, I have been telling clients what they need to hear, not what they want to hear. Disney chairman Bob Iger said it well: “The riskiest thing we can do is just maintain the status quo".

The world around us is changing quicker than any of us could ever have imagined. Falling on old paradigms and institutional platitudes will not open doors to new ways of thinking. I believe that every day offers an opportunity to drive change. This challenger mentality fuels me.

As an advisor and partner for more than 25 years to corporations in every industry, in nearly every country, facing any number of business issues, each day I have the chance to challenge clients’ thinking.  Whether I am working to help improve the effectiveness of their leadership team or to find their next chief executive officer, I always strive to venture off the tried-and-true path, to bend the way people think, pushing them toward an unconventional approach. Why? Because I have seen firsthand how challenging the status quo can lead to remarkable results.

Supercharge Creativity

Challengers ignite creativity. They are not afraid to color outside the lines. They ask uncomfortable questions of themselves, their colleagues, and their clients, because they realize curiosity leads to stronger results, better products and more successful outcomes. As Henry Ford taught us, “If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses.” Challengers inspire and excite others to devise the most compelling ideas, to reevaluate how they do things, oftentimes quite simply by trying something new.

Pump the Breaks on Turnover

As we all try to navigate the Great Resignation, challengers are trying different approaches to create a dedicated people strategy that continuously evolves and keeps employees engaged, motivated and focused. CEOs of many US retailers closed stores this past Thanksgiving, encouraging employees to spend time with their families instead of being at work. Spanx CEO Sara Blakely surprised her employees with first-class plane tickets anywhere in the world and $10,000. Amazon will kick off 2022 paying college tuition fees upfront for most of its 750,000 hourly employees. These are big decisions that push the envelope and put employees first.

Unearth the Real Business Issues

Challengers dig to get to the core issues that hide many layers below the surface. I have seen on a number of occasions how a company’s success can mask underlying problems. A challenger embraces the opportunity to look deeper. Clients hire us to solve one business issue, but in looking further, we find there are other things going on contributing to the problem. Japanese inventor and industrialist Sakichi Toyoda famously developed “The Five Whys Technique,” which simply involves asking “Why?” five times. This basic concept was used to trace the root cause of problems within the manufacturing process of Toyota Motors and ultimately revolutionized automobile manufacturing. Immersing ourselves fully into our clients’ businesses and rolling up our sleeves to look into underlying issues often reveals a host of contributory factors that must be addressed before tackling that central question.

Sit on the Obstacles Instead of Going Around Them

The best leaders do not simply move past an obstacle, they spend time on it, find meaning in it, and use it to their advantage. Challenges are not limitations, they are change drivers. Look at James Dyson, who developed more than 5,000 failed prototypes over 15 years in his attempt to build a better vacuum cleaner. Each obstacle and every failure brought him one step closer to success, and to the $9.4 billion he is worth today.

Improve your Reputation

A challenger mindset needs to start deep within. Taking a different point of view and defending it with passion by connecting to purpose and assessing whether the right behaviors and values are manifesting is critical. Our research shows that clients want to do business with and employees want to work for companies with a clear purpose, where leaders take a stand and match what they say they will do with meaningful, measurable and consistent actions. The willingness to make disruptive decisions and the courage and resilience to stay the course in the face of setbacks and pressure produces the power to lead with conviction and drive reputational value on the journey to change.

A challenger mindset does not have to be innate; it can most certainly be a learned virtue. Change your mindset, take risks, ask the difficult questions, and always come armed with solutions. It is never too late to start.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices