Putting the Pieces Together | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Putting the Pieces Together

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

October 06, 2021

4 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryC-Suite SuccessionBoard Director and Chair Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The work of boards has never been more difficult and important. Board refreshment and succession planning has become critical in today's new normal.

Close

Rich Fields

Boston

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Laura Sanderson

London

Increasingly assertive institutional investors, aggressive hedge fund activists, empowered ESG experts, and powerful proxy advisors are ramping up their demands on public company boards. These and other influential stakeholders are scrutinizing corporate boards to see if they have the right people to succeed—and that they are committed to effective refreshment, board succession, and board evaluation practices. For these reasons, Russell Reynolds is updating its prior advice to directors and boards on how to successfully navigate these heightened expectations. Those found wanting are more likely than ever to face meaningful consequences, including losing for support incumbent directors in both contested and uncontested elections.

Part of the reason for this enhanced attention is simple: the work of boards has never been more difficult and important. From the unprecedented challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, economic volatility, geopolitical instability, and board agendas bursting at the seams with topics new and old, boards and their members are being tested like never before. Many boards have risen to the occasion, providing steady and thoughtful leadership; others have struggled, failing to add (or eroding) value.

Against this backdrop, many boards and leadership teams have taken a step back to evaluate their composition and effectiveness, asking themselves tough questions:

01. What skills, backgrounds, and experiences are absent?

02. What skillsets are relevant for the company of yesterday but not tomorrow?

03. Are our board, committees, and individual directors all effectively contributing?

04. Are there any board leadership or committee roles we could not replace if an incumbent left?

05. Will our board refreshment and effectiveness activities withstand stakeholder scrutiny?

To answer those challenging questions, enhance risk management, and support governance best practices, boards can start with a board composition analysis, a strategic planning process that consists of four primary activities led by the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee (“the Committee”):

Confirm Agreement on Company Strategy: Designing the right board for the future requires knowing where the Company is headed. The first step is to confirm agreement on the company’s strategy, including key strategic risks to the company. This is the foundation on which all successful board composition analyses rest.

Align on the Skills and Experiences Required: The strategy is the foundation on which the committee develops a clear and agreed-upon set of definitions for the key backgrounds, skills, and experiences (including diversity) that will be needed at the board level. A successful process will be transparent and rigorous, incorporating both feedback from each director and an
unbiased evaluation of existing skills and experiences against the agreed-upon definitions.

Forecast Board Changes: Some board vacancies can be anticipated, such as those driven by mandatory board refreshment policies or the stated plans of directors. Boards should be aware of those expected changes so that they can plan ahead—recognizing, of course, that some departures will not be so predictable.

Disclose More: Investors are seeking more information in an easily digestible format to enable them to understand how board composition links to the company’s strategy. Having completed the prior steps, board leaders and the legal team can determine what should be disclosed to investors about the board’s approach to refreshment, board composition, and related board effectiveness activities.

Common Mistakes

As we have written about in recent years, we have seen four common errors that derail this important work:

Putting Strategy and Purpose Second: We often see boards undertake these efforts without explicitly connecting them to the overall strategy or purpose of the company. Other times strategy is recognized as critical, but a failure to agree on what the strategy is makes it impossible to agree on the key qualifications needed in a new director.

Not Looking at the Changing Landscape and Competitors: Boards often fail to benchmark themselves against their peer group, missing a key indicator of what competitors have determined is essential to success in the future. Failing to compare to peers can create challenges when engaging with investors, who often evaluate boards and corporate governance practices sector by sector.

Neglecting Departures: Movement of directors is a natural occurrence — whether due to age or tenure limits, over boarding, or individual director desires and life changes. Failing to plan ahead for these changes can hamper the Committee’s work, leaving it with less time to effect a successful transition.

Forgetting About Committees and Leadership Positions: Board composition changes have ripple effects in committee composition and in who occupies various board and committee leadership roles. All of these variables should be considered when identifying key traits for an open board position.

Once the board undertakes thoughtful composition analysis, it is important that it is an inclusive and transparent process involving every single director. This can’t simply be managed by the general counsel or another executive from afar.

Part of the reason that the process must be inclusive and transparent is that sometimes the process will identify redundancies, skills gaps, or other issues that cause a board to have a hard conversation with an existing director who may not have a role on tomorrow’s board. While the board has to own the process and the results, using a seasoned outside advisor can ensure there is the necessary objectivity and rigor in the process, and that any tough conversations are handled deftly.

The Benefits of Action

Rigorous refreshment activities create value in numerous ways:

Sets the Board up for Longer-term Success: A well-run board succession effort prevents a transactional approach to director recruitment. Similarly, it enables thoughtful board rotation, including for committee chairs and the independent board leader, and therefore could be used to improve diversity efforts in board leadership roles.

Provides the Board or the Committee Chair a Neutral, Data-based Tool for Assessing Individual Contributions to the Board: It’s difficult for any chair to sit down and address issues of personal contribution with a fellow director, but a board composition analysis creates tools and opportunity to have a more neutral, fact-based discussion about skills and qualifications. Likewise, it can provide a foundation for talking about director retirement, leadership changes, and committee rotation—all things a healthy, well-performing board ought to
address.

Earns Credit from Outside Stakeholders: A rigorous board composition analysis is further evidence that a board is taking its responsibilities seriously, is thinking about the future direction of the Company, and is prepared to help steward the organization over the long term. The board, if it so chooses, can disclose the analysis to outside investors.

Thoughtful refreshment and succession planning are critical to an effective and high-performing board. This is essential for boards that hope to avoid costly and time-consuming scrutiny from shareholders and other key stakeholders—and who don’t want to risk leaving a door open for activists.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices