Should CFOs Venture into Private Equity? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Should CFOs Venture into Private Equity?

FinancePrivate Capital

Article

Emily Taylor

June 22, 2022

3 min

FinancePrivate Capital

Executive Summary

The emergence and divergence of the model CFO profile in Private Equity and Venture Capital backed portfolio companies.

Close

Emily Taylor

New York
London

Since our previous publication, an exciting trend to emerge among our private capital clients is their increased willingness to make a creative CFO hire. While we have seen the emergence of preferred archetypes for Private Equity and Venture Capital CFOs, there is also greater appetite to test the norm.

To better understand the CFO hiring playbook, Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed hiring trends in our database of over 3,000 European Private Equity and Venture Capital backed companies. We have advanced our understanding of the model CFO for each stage of investment across the European landscape.

Interesting trends are most evident across measures of individual demographics, qualifications, training foundations and routes to hiring.

Ten percent of Private Equity CFOs are female versus 13% in Venture, which is also against 16% in PLC. Whilst this is not hugely distinguishable, it is potentially indicative of a positive trend from Private Equity to Venture Capital and an inclination for earlier stage companies to be more active at the start in their thinking around diversity. As expected, when looking at age statistics, the average age of a Venture Capital CFO is younger than a Private Equity CFO.

Tellingly in Private Equity, the leading qualification for CFOs is the ACA, with only one in five across Europe holding the MBA. Meanwhile, MBAs are dominant among Venture Capital CFOs, with three in five portfolio company CFOs holding such qualification. This lends to the thesis that Venture Capital CFOs typically span across companies in broader, commercial roles beyond their core finance position.

Doubling down on the training background of Venture Capital versus Private Equity CFOs reveals early divergences. A key differentiation is that 25% of Venture portfolio CFOs started their career as investors, yet only 5% of Private Equity CFOs bring this experience.

It is a well-known fact that the CFO is the most frequently upgraded function following a buyout, with successful candidates overwhelmingly likely to be externally hired. External talent is recruited into
Private Equity companies in nine out of ten instances, relative to 76% of time in Venture portfolio companies. This is caution to incumbents and internal candidates, whose promotion prospects are disproportionately slim.

However, existing data is only representative of hiring propensities to date, without being able to forecast future trends and movements. It also does not allow for – to coin a topical phrase – our ‘lived experiences’. We are observing a genuine, consistent demand from clients for profiles that may not fit the standard archetype that has come before.

For example, we recently appointed a highly impressive CFO into an established Private Equity backed data and services company. Her career spanned investment banking, strategy consulting, and PE/VC investing before transitioning into her first CFO position. The reason such a move worked well was down to both the quality of the individual and the client’s preparedness to provide ongoing support through a robust, experienced Board and resources to build a strong finance capability.

Another recent example of ours is from working with a high growth Venture Capital backed Unicorn and placing a more traditional PLC/ buy-out CFO. This individual has onboarded successfully, owing to their technical capability but also because they demonstrate the leadership and cultural characteristics, i.e., flexibility and adaptability, that one needs to thrive in a high-performance, high-growth company.

Our continual advice to both Private Equity and Venture clients is to:

Begin with a broad search landscape

Meet candidates early on ranging from the ‘bulls-eye’ cohort to those with more lateral experiences

Use references and assessment tools to fully understand behaviours and personas

Build a best practice on-boarding programme using the data collected through the search processes

Read more about Private Equity:

But Have They Ever Worked in PE Before?

Authors

Jessica Gosnell works closely with private equity companies to build best-in-class leadership teams for their portfolio companies. She is based in London.

Emily Taylor executive searches for financial funds with a particular focus on senior-level investment professionals. She is based in London.

Courtney Byrne is a research associate based in London.

Thank you! We’ll be in touch.

Contact our Growth practice

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in the UK: Why Most Organizations Aren’t Ready

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices