How to become a first-time CEO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How to Become a First-Time CEO

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipSuccessionSustainability OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchCEO Succession

Article

Laura Sanderson

September 15, 2021

4 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipSuccessionSustainability OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchCEO Succession

Executive Summary

How do you make it to the corner office—and stay there?

Close

Laura Sanderson

London

Becoming a CEO for the first time is one of the most significant achievements a leader will encounter during their professional career. Reaching this coveted position, though, requires decades of proven success, business acumen, leadership excellence and, of course, a little luck.

So, how can next-gen leaders position themselves for success?

Drawing on our experience of placing thousands of CEOs into organizations around the world, we have a unique vantage point on what boards and executive committees look for when vetting CEO candidates.

Here are the key considerations that next-gen leaders need to think about when looking to break into the corner office.

Understand what it truly takes to be a high-impact leader

There is not one defining personality trait that allows leaders to succeed. Instead, the best leaders are multifaceted, embodying a complex mix of abilities and personas. When we analyzed the psychological profiles of five million workers and executives, we found that the most effective C-suite leaders embodied both ‘loud’ and ‘quiet’ competencies. They were able to handle contradictory, sometimes even conflicting, ideas simultaneously. They showed both rational and emotional intelligence. It is this paradoxical expression of personality, and the resulting agility, that sets the most successful leaders apart.

They are both disruptive and pragmatic: Organizations need leaders to disrupt the status quo with innovation, but they also must be pragmatic about focus, priorities, and the pace of innovation.

They are both risk-taking and reluctant: A good leader takes calculated risks and is opportunistic, but we also want them to be somewhat reluctant and show some vigilance before steering the organization off a cliff.

They are both heroic and vulnerable: A heroic leader needs to be vulnerable as well, in order to command true followership and to avoid their perseverance and grit turning into self-delusions. They need to take feedback and external data to heart and make continuous improvements to themselves and their organizations.

They are both galvanizing and connecting: Leaders must galvanize support with energy and inspiration, but they also need to know when to take a step back and share credit, promote the success of others, and to connect the organization to become something stronger and greater than themselves and the cult of their own personality.

Nurture in-demand skills

Every organization will have different criteria to judge incoming CEO candidates against. But we also know that there are certain skills, abilities, and experiences that are increasingly prioritized.

As the world spins faster, leaders are expected to show a willingness and ability to adapt to change. Our CEO Clarke Murphy explains, for example, that boardrooms and executive committees are increasingly looking for CEO candidates with a high LQ, or Learning Quotient. "What the Covid pandemic has brought on is the need for pretty rapid transformation,” he says. “Leaders not only have to have emotional intelligence, they have to have LQ, the ability to learn, listen, watch, and communicate transformation."

Boards today are equally looking for leaders with a demonstrable track record of positively impacting sustainability outcomes or moving the needle on diversity, equity, and inclusion. Demand for these skills will only intensify. Be sure to expose yourself to crucible experiences and development programs that allow you to build muscles in these areas.

Understand routes to the top

CEOs can come from all parts of an organization, but some titles and experiences statistically have more success than others. For example, a survey of 675 companies among the Fortune 500 and S&P 500 found that more than half of CEOs had previously been COOs or division presidents. By contrast, less than one in 10 had previously held CMO or CFO positions. For those wanting to one day become a CEO, they should position themselves to take on these types of positions when the time is right. That may involve a career transition or an understanding of the need to acquire some of the skills and responsibilities of those jobs to create a more complete leadership picture. Often, gaining P&L experience is critical in order to maneuver into the C-suite and future CEO roles.

Familiarize yourself with succession processes

For leaders who have spent a significant part of their career with one organization, the most direct path to becoming CEO is often through that organization’s succession planning process. Executives should state a desire to one day become CEO, understand the skills the company wants in that position, and seek opportunities to gather the required expertise to meet that criteria. Remember that in the case of a planned CEO departure, the succession planning process starts several years out—typically three to five years before the expected transition. And that candidates are rarely just judged against peers internally, but those externally too.

Stay laser-focused on your vision

A board will always look for the leaders that will move an organization forward—whether that’s expanding into new markets or geographies, driving transformation, or masterminding a turnaround in company fortunes. When the time comes, you must be ready to articulate a bold vision for change and an executable plan for how to get there. You will also need to be clear on why you are the best person to lead this charge. What makes you different? What values do you bring? What is your leadership style? What motivations led you to make the career choices you’ve made? What do you want your legacy to be? The more clear-eyed you can be on these questions, the greater your chances of earning the trust of the board and executive committee—and becoming more than a visitor in that corner office.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices