Portfolio Company CFOs Have The Power to Define The Strength of Your Exit | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Portfolio Company CFOs Have The Power to Define The Strength of Your Exit

Portfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinancial ServicesFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionExecutive Search

Article

September 29, 2021

4 min

Portfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinancial ServicesFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Our recent survey reveals that private equity investors have clear views on what makes a successful portfolio company CFO.

Close

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Jim Lawson

New York

What matters more to exit multiples: business fundamentals or leadership teams?

According to Russell Reynolds Associates’ recent survey of US-based investors from 30 leading private equity firms, a full 100% of PE investors said that a weak leadership team was a top factor contributing to weak exits. This was far more than those citing disappointing sales, market conditions, cost reductions or any other business factor. In other words,
PE investors believe the talent on the leadership team outweighs the fundamentals of the business when it comes to maximizing returns.

Investing time into assessing and supporting the existing leadership team—and recruiting a new one as needed—is essential to the strength of the exit.

What core competencies and skills should PE investors look for in their CFO candidates? Furthermore, given their importance, when is the right time to plan, assess and hire a CFO to maximize portfolio company value?

Our survey revealed some clear trends, as well as common misconceptions, among PE investors.

01. Moving out of the pandemic, CFOs will need to increase their focus on partnership, both within their company and with their sponsor – but should not lose sight of building high-performing finance teams

When asked about the most critical leadership traits for portfolio company CFOs in the next two to three years, PE investors put the emphasis on portfolio company CFOs being strategic business partners and driving results within the company while also effectively partnering and communicating with the PE sponsor.

What do you believe will be the most critical leadership traits for your portfolio company CFOs for the next 2-3 years?

% respondents who responded very to extremely important

02. Financial planning & analysis is the preferred route to the top

Nearly every PE investor views FP&A as an important technical skill for portfolio CFOs, compared to 75% who see accounting and control experience as a top requirement. Given this, investors may want to revisit their hiring criteria for step-up candidates. CFOs who come from companies with strong rigor around financial analytics could be supported by a strong controller.

Regardless of experience working with PE in the past, PE investors prefer someone with seated CFO experience (public/ private), with 71% seeing sitting CFO experience/proven leadership as highly important, versus only 50% for PE experience.

How important are the following technical competencies and experiences for a portfolio CFO?

% respondents who responded very to extremely important

03. Unique circumstances call for unique experience…to a point

Although proven experience correlates to predictable performance, finding candidates who fit this experience profile can quickly shrink the talent pool.

When a PE investor is contemplating an IPO, 82% see IPO experience as required for a CFO. Given the complexity of the deal and the financial gains that ride on it, this requirement is practical. The reality, though, is that only 12% of CFOs who lead IPOs have past experience doing so as a CFO. By setting IPO experience as a ‘must-have,’ the already small pool of available CFOs is further reduced.

Conversely, while PE investors see IPO situations as needing specific experience, they do not place the same level of emphasis on industry experience. Only 30% of respondents saw having industry experience as highly important to portfolio CFO success.

82%

12%

of investors want a CFO to bring past IPO experience but only

of CFOs who lead an IPO have led one before

04. PE Investors value leadership assessments – but most run out of time to perform them robustly

While PE investors think most about the skills needed within the portfolio company leadership team during the due diligence phase, only 55% actually do a rigorous evaluation of their portfolio CFOs – with lack of time as the top reason for not doing it.

For those PE investors who do assess their leadership talent during due diligence, few used deeper assessment tools, with fewer than 20% leveraging in-depth psychometric tools and other similar methods. While the least used, these more rigorous methods provide the best information on the leader.

While faced with a lack of time and a limited selection of tools, PE investors are aware of the value that comes from doing this right. As previously noted, 100% of investors surveyed believe the right leadership team becomes the difference between a weak and strong exit.

100% of PE investors believe the leadership team makes a difference to strong exits

05. The ideal CFO replacement time is post-deal

Deeper pre-deal assessments allow PE firms to determine how the leadership team stacks up against their value creation plans. If existing leaders do not meet expectations, firms have two options:

Promote from within and support the leaders’ development, or

Recruit and replace the existing leader.

Most PE firms (79%) choose the latter, with 42% replacing their portfolio CFO immediately following the deal, and an additional 25% do so within two years.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices