Leadership/#Disrupted: A New Lens on Leadership Competencies | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Leadership/#Disrupted: A New Lens on Leadership Competencies

Technology and InnovationFinancial ServicesAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

+ 5 authors

October 29, 2021

8 min

Technology and InnovationFinancial ServicesAssessment and Benchmarking

Executive summary

A new generation of banking leadership is being defined by its ability to respond quickly to multiple forces that are disrupting traditional leadership agendas.

Close

Mary-Caroline Tillman

New York

James Diggines

Singapore

Jane Bird

London

Robert Voth

Chicago

Sophie Saeed

London

Chris Davis

New York

Sean Dineen

Boston

David Lange

Chicago

This paper continues our series that explores the growing importance of innovative and inclusive leadership in banking and is based on a study of over 9,000 senior executives carried out over the past four years. By exploring the underlying competencies and behaviors, we look at how banks can best adapt their approach to developing their leaders.

Faster growing firms have stronger leaders

Our leadership assessment data suggests a direct correlation between stronger innovative and inclusive banking leadership and higher performing organizations.

With exceptional talent already working at exceptional organizations, how can your firm differentiate its approach to sourcing and promoting talent?

Are you fully leveraging available data assets to better identify leaders with these competencies?

Are you targeting the specific leadership competencies that are needed to succeed in the context of its operating environment?

Are you minimizing bias in the selection and evaluation of these competencies?

Target competencies that tackle todays needs

Success factors are not static over time. What makes for an effective leader in the years after a financial crisis is not necessarily what makes for a successful leader during a period of digital disruption or changing societal and customer expectations.

Our assessment data shows that the demand for leaders with the characteristics and competencies associated with stronger innovation and inclusion leadership is growing as firms look to tackle these emerging challenges.

Banks are increasingly targeting experiential, creative, and empathetic characteristics. Conversely, we are seeing lower indexing on more compliant and cautious behaviors.

Continually refresh target competencies as new strategic priorities emerge. By using metrics that are sensitive to the changing nature of the business around them, leaders will improve an organization’s ability to adapt to new ways of thinking and minimize the longer-term risk of the organization becoming obsolete.

Focus on how key roles are evolving

Three roles have seen a particular elevation in their importance and impact in banking, both due to COVID-19 and longer-term structural shifts in the industry. We have seen a corresponding shift in the competencies that are being prioritized for these roles.

Chief Financial Officers (CFOs)

Companies are looking to strategically reshape their businesses, creating demand for new types of financial officers. The role is increasingly cross-functional, driving transformation and playing a proactive role in influencing change in the company. Many CFOs are now also at the forefront of digitization.

Chief Human Resources Officers (CHROs)

CHROs had elevated roles during COVID-19, visibly helping CEOs manage the present and lead their companies into the future. They need to be the stewards of change across multiple stakeholder groups, staying abreast of the drivers of transformation, while remaining sensitive to the needs of an increasingly virtual employee base.

Understand the elevated needs and impact of mission-critical roles within your organization, and make sure that you are targeting the necessary competencies to deliver against these in hiring, development and succession planning.

Reduce bias to reach your full potential

Data can help identify blockages and bottlenecks that prevent a talent pipeline from running optimally.

One challenge occurs when assessment processes over-index on certain competencies, creating a barrier to progress or glass ceiling for groups that exhibit those traits less frequently. One example in the selection of CEOs is the bias towards confidence, which is typically a male-oriented trait – and so we see fewer women CEOs.

Our cross-industry benchmarks show that women who are elevated to the CEO role tend to be stronger across a range of other competencies than their male counterparts.

As such, some businesses may be failing to reach their full potential because of systemic selection bias. Breaking out of this cycle can be challenging, as employers tend to gravitate towards people who think and act like them, and so it can often be self-reinforcing.

Talent leaders should set up regular and objective evaluations of selection and promotion processes to identify and eliminate inherent biases in the way that talent is measured, with the aim of maximizing the potential of leadership teams.

Appendix: Methodology

Changing how we measure potential

The methodology was developed by our in-house psychologists in partnership with Hogan Assessments. It is based on studies of “best-in-class” senior leaders, mapped to a 95% confidence interval, and synthetically validated against a dataset of 5.5 million executives.

Mark Temple leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services Sector. He is based in London.

Leadership/#Disrupted: A New Lens on Leadership Competencies

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices