When companies grow up | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

When companies grow up

SuccessionLeadership

Article

October 11, 2021

3 min

SuccessionLeadership

Executive Summary

Founders often care about their company as much as parents care about their child.

Close

When is the right time for founders to expand the management level - or even to leave it themselves? My thoughts on this based on some current examples.

Founders often care about their company as much as parents care about their child. Even before the birth, all thoughts revolve around the coming newborn. Once in the world, they know "their baby" and all its special characteristics best themselves. In the first months and years, parents and founders are united by the same goal: the healthy growth of their fosterlings.

The onset of their adolescence heralds the end of this phase and of parental influence.  Yesterday's little baby wants to stand on its own two feet and prove itself in the world of the grown-ups - even if not everything goes smoothly yet. As is the case with young people, this step also succeeds to varying degrees with companies. One of the key factors in determining how smoothly the transition goes is the course set in the first few years of life.

Gorillas and N26 build sustainable structures with more top executives

A revealing example of this is the story of the fast-food delivery service Gorillas. Founded in the summer of 2020 by Kağan Sümer, Gorillas drivers now cycle through more than 50 major cities around the world - from Berlin, London and Paris to New York. But the rapid growth has downsides: Employees of the startup took to the streets in June 2021 in solidarity with a driver after he was fired, blocking a warehouse in Berlin-Mitte. The situation escalated to such an extent that even German Labor Minister Hubertus Heil (SPD) met with the Gorillas for talks.

Like other delivery services, Gorillas is also still in the red. The start-up needs more funds from investors. In an interview with Handelsblatt, Gorillas’ head of human resources, Deena Fox, now explained that she is currently looking for new employees for the management levels in the areas of technology, product, marketing, finance and human resources. This, she said, is intended to strike "a balance between the speed of our growth and long-term sustainability." Gorillas' perspective and strategy is thus shifting toward "a stronger focus on building a scalable business infrastructure," Fox said.

Neobank N26, founded in 2013 by Valentin Stalf and Maximilian Tayenthal, is also experiencing growing pains. According to industry experts, the startup had also long focused too much on growth and attracting new customers, neglecting to build solid structures and controls. An increasing number of suspected money laundering cases recently called the German financial regulator BaFin to the scene. In order to avert the threat of sanctions, N26 then announced that it would expand its management level to include a risk director.

Flaconi founders leave profitable company of their choice

But not every adolescent immediately confronts their parents with such tangible difficulties. The example of Flaconi shows that things can work out differently. Björn Kolbmüller and Paul Schwarzenholz founded the startup after graduating from university - always with the goal of leaving the online perfumery one day. Six years later, the time had come: the perfume startup had been completely sold to the Munich-based media group ProSiebenSat.1, and two new managing directors had been found. For the founders, this was the ideal time to get out, as they revealed to businessinsider.de: At the time of their withdrawal, their "baby" was standing on its own two feet, was financially secure - and had recently even become profitable.

Growth sometimes requires experience and a fresh mind from the outside

Letting go of the next generation is not easy for parents or founders. However, some events, such as a gap year abroad, the first own child or the entry into a new market, offer the ideal time for this. For parents, it's reassuring to know that competent and experienced companions are on hand to help with this step. As part of the expansion of its European business, the US e-commerce home furnishings retailer Wayfair has decided to appoint Dr. Jens Uwe Intat as its European CEO. He brings 30 years of experience in building and managing leading e-commerce companies such as Amazon Germany or Electronic Arts - and gives the existing management team the good feeling of confidence with this experience.

Founders and parents alike care about the success of their offspring. At a certain level of maturity, this requires new influences from outside and a step into the wider world. What a stay abroad without their parents might be for children, an IPO can be for companies. The founders of Autodoc, a Berlin-based online retailer of automotive spare parts and accessories, have made provisions for this step. Before turning the company into a stock corporation in September 2021, by the middle of this year they had brought two managers experienced with IPOs into the executive suite of their "baby," Christian Gisy as co-managing director and Bert Althaus as CFO. The founders now help steer Autodoc's fortunes from the supervisory board, among other positions.

The examples show: The love and sense of responsibility of parents and founders toward their children probably never ends in most cases. But instead of wanting to control everything themselves, it is often better to take a step back and act in the interests of their offspring. "When kids are little, give them roots. When they are big, give them wings," - this advice seems to be true for parents and founders alike.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices