Succession planning is legacy building | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Succession planning is legacy building

CEO Succession

Article

Justus O’Brien

May 06, 2022

6 min

CEO Succession

Executive Summary

Legacy-building succession planning requires a CEOs personal engagement early in their tenure as CEO.

Close

Justus O’Brien

Stamford

As CEO, you have a vision and plan to deliver results, handsomely rewarding shareholders and employees alike. And while that may look like success to many, including you, the reality is that it won’t be enough to create a truly enduring legacy.

Your legacy is about more than bottom-line results. It’s about how you leave the company—meaning in the strongest position possible, fit for the future, and, crucially, in the capable hands of a well-chosen successor.

After value-creation, you could say that an enlightened approach to succession planning is one of the most important things you will do as CEO.

Legacy-building succession planning requires your personal engagement early in your tenure as CEO.  It requires a robust process that leaves little to chance, one that is intentional, well-thought-out and affords opportunities to develop your successor, or even better, several successors the board can eventually choose from.

Legacy building means starting early

Surprisingly few CEOs take on succession planning headfirst.

Understandably, they are consumed by their jobs, intensely focused on the here-and-now.  ‘We’ll get to it later – there's plenty of time,’ typically is the hedge.  Succession is the furthest thing from their minds, or from the board’s mind for that matter, so long as things are going well.

And let’s be honest, some may even dread the thought. It’s a little like staring down the well of one’s own mortality.  No one likes reminding that the end will eventually come to all of us.

But the most likely explanation is that most CEOs and boards simply fall into the trap of underestimating what’s required to put together a purposeful and robust succession plan.

They leave it to the last minute, when the clock is ticking ominously and it’s already too late.

Don’t let those miscues undo your legacy. Be bolder. Be more farsighted than that. Your company and your shareholders deserve and expect it, so put trepidation aside and take succession planning firmly by the reins.

And that means working closely with your board and advisors to find and develop potential successors ready to meet the future needs of your company.

If by the end of your tenure you’ve failed to deliver stellar successors, your many other achievements as CEO will be diminished, and your legacy will be tarnished.

A multi-year effort

Enlightened CEOs insist on an early start to succession planning, sometimes five or six years before they plan to retire.

They work with their advisors and board to develop a forward-looking success profile that serves as a touchstone for assessing their current talent.

They assess their internal succession candidates with an eye to development and with a focus on the skills, experiences and competencies they will require as CEO.

They invest in an “outside-in” approach to development, complementing internal experiences with masterclasses that expose them to the issues and experiences they will encounter as CEO. As a benefit of staring early, internal candidates have the opportunity to experience multiple developmental assignments during the process.

Enlightened CEOs assess whether their senior talent pipeline for succession is sufficiently diverse and, if not, recruit diverse talent into their organizations with sufficient time to integrate and develop them.

While their focus is primarily on developing internal talent, enlightened CEOs also keep their eye on the best external talent, not only for benchmarking purposes but also, if needed, to recruit fresh talent with unique experiences essential to the future of the company.

An early start, a thoughtful and comprehensive plan crafted together with the board, rigorous and regular assessments of internal candidates, an outside-in approach to development, and an openness to enrich and diversify their talent pool through external hires—these are the hallmarks of enlightened CEO succession planning.

Getting your board on-board

Enlightened CEOs get their board engaged in succession planning early.

Just as some CEOs can be reluctant or slow to embrace robust succession planning, so do some boards fear the unintended consequences of succession planning, like spooking investors or setting off distracting internal horse races.

But these are tired and misleading shibboleths. In truth, investors and regulators expect and require companies to have well thought out succession plans.

And the highest-performing and most progressive boards start thinking about their next succession as soon as the current CEO is selected.

The first step in getting the board more deeply involved is getting them aligned around a forward-looking success profile.

Ironically, the greatest value the board brings to CEO succession planning is its distance from the day-to-day. We surveyed over 1,000 board directors and found that the best boards take a more macro view: not only are they paying attention to the here and now, but they are also looking at least five years into the future to figure out what your organization needs to be ready for.

The board needs to be able to recognize this and find a way to combine the company’s short-term, immediate needs with its long-term, future goals. There is an element of prophesying here. But, like the best predictive analytics software, it’s prophesying rooted in data and logical inference based on trends and patterns.

Selecting the right CEO is probably the most impactful decision a board can make—and to do it well, they must achieve consensus on what ‘right’ is. They should focus on clearly identifying the traits a CEO will need to navigate change of all stripes: political, cultural, technological, industry trends, buying behaviors, and so on.

There is no need to pick a frontrunner early.  The board should consider optionality: having a few candidates ready to step up depending on what is needed at the time when you step down.

Once your board has identified internal candidates (and benchmarked them against the best external talent), you and the CHRO can start working with them to fill in any gaps in their abilities and experiences. And, from there, to set the candidates—and the company—up for success.

But you have to start early to do it. If your board is not already thinking about CEO planning, then they’re already behind the curve—and you need to take steps to change that. It may be the board’s responsibility to select your successor, but it is your responsibility to work early and proactively with the board to develop viable successors.

Oh, and those 1,100 directors we surveyed recently?  Directors from the best boards in the world tell us that they have robust CEO succession plans, they start doing it early, and they engage with management throughout the process.  In other words, the best directors want you to do this – and to do it with you.

Succession as a strategy

For most companies, CEO transitions present challenges. Executives get nervous, internal stars who did not make the cut may move to competitors, and stock prices can wobble.

A strong succession planning process and strategy can prevent that. By starting early and working with the board through a deliberate process geared for success, you can avoid a rocky transition and keep your company strong even through change.

For the enlightened CEO, collaborating on an intentional transition is not just a way to protect share value—it is how you ensure an enduring legacy.

The next step to safeguard your legacy

An intentional transition starts with a robust plan. See what it looks like in real life and learn about other organizations’ journeys with our new guide to CEO succession planning.

Start your CEO Succession story

Talk to us

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices