The Enterprise Supply Chain Value Revolution | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Enterprise Supply Chain Value Revolution

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive Search

Article

October 28, 2021

5 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive Search

Executive summary

CEOs and Chief Supply Chain Officers can no longer focus only on safety, quality, cost and speed to market.

Close

The Enterprise Supply Chain Value Revolution is a term I developed describing the exponentially growing variables coming into play when measuring the performance, value and impact of the Supply Chain on the enterprise. CEOs and chief supply chain officers have a conundrum. The days of focus only on safety, quality, cost and speed to market are long gone. Compliance and sustainability added responsibility to protect companies’ market positions and to drive social responsibility initiatives. Executing these additions alone have a proven effect on shareholder value. But the impact variables for supply chain performance are growing exponentially over the recent years.

During my rise as a supply chain leader and business owner I have not seen an equation add so many performance variables as supply chain performance has over the past decade. The last five years alone has added new obligations to the chief supply chain officer’s responsibility. The CSCO is now asked to solve the conundrums brought on by geo-politics run amok, natural disasters, epidemics, cyber attacks, etc. These considerations go way beyond safety, quality, delivery and costs. New KPIs are being developed to measure the readiness to prevent or address the unknown. But how do we prioritize and deploy shareholder value saving investments in preventing failures during unplanned events and where does one focus the limited resources. Prevention? Reaction?

Today’s supply chain officers, boards and CEOs are faced with a conundrum. How to go beyond measuring performance in terms of SQDC (safety, quality, delivery and cost) with a minor in continuity of business to increased focus on continuity of business for the enterprise? Two other increasingly important strategic variables are emerging that could be diametrically opposed to the traditional key supply chain performance metrics of past. The two additional variables of Resilience and Agility are key in not only improving sustained performance but now increasingly weighs in analysts, shareholders, investors, activists and customers view of the strength, financial viability and resilience of an enterprise. This focus leads to a necessary evolution of the capabilities of a supply chain officer to address the unknown and in some cases the unimaginable.

I have many clients and have caught the leadership and even myself trying to identify and address acute potential failures and plan for it. HAZMAT for chemical spills, drills for fire, disaster recovery for systems, etc. have been the norm. Now add pandemics, climate events and cyber attacks. Also, will there be another 9/11 event, Tsunami, earthquake, etc.? I have experience in continuity planning for Disaster Recovery scenarios across many industries. The focus is to protect the people first which has always been key then pivot focus on the customer and the enterprise. But you cannot plan or predict every scenario. The cost, resource and focus on protecting or preventing every scenario could in itself injure the enterprise.

To win a battle against known and unknown threats to the supply chain, a Board, CEO and CSCO should not focus on having a detailed plan for each potential scenario, but focus on the resilience and agility of the supply chain itself. This introduces initiatives that apply across all or clusters of scenarios. I can explain how the process works in another edition, however the process of event clustering is important to developing comprehensive solutions.

Resilience is basically the ability of the enterprise’ supply chain to establish continuity of service or supply to the market during a potentially enterprise killing event. Agility is the ability to create alternate means to service the market thus out flanking the enterprise threatening event. More and more leaders are in this context recognizing that the supply chain officers’ role has become and will continue to be exponentially more complex.

Protecting supply continuity is critical. Afterall over 60% of the cost of any manufactured good likely comes from the supply chain, more if you include labor. Further, the impact of any disruption can injure or even be fatal to any business not prepared for adversity. Supply Chain Resilience and Agility is a must have level of focus for the enterprise. The Wall Street Journal reported, on 2021-4-16, that over 200,000 businesses shuttered during the pandemic. Federal Reserve economists suggest small-business failures due to the coronavirus pandemic were exceptionally hit hard.

I recently began a series of discussions at the university and forum levels introducing the concept of how to re-engineer the organization to traverse adversity profitably. The introduction of agility and resilience goes beyond focus on traditional disaster recovery measures. How a company prepares to be competitive in the face of adversity is a key question that I discussed this year with the masters class at one of the top supply chain institutes in the world, the University of Tennessee Haslam School of Business Supply Chain Institute MBA Program in the United States. I also introduced the complex topic in executive forums such as IMA.

Resilience and Agility initiatives are already underway spurred by COVID, tariffs, security, etc.: A 2021 Gartner Survey of 1,300 Supply chain professionals noted that “87% of Supply Chain Professionals are challenged to invest in supply chain resiliency in the next two years.” Also, “89% are asked to invest in Agility.” The conundrum remains that these two initiatives are often in conflict with costs and adds quality and speed considerations. Cost remain a priority challenging CSCOs. CSCOs must now find a balance between resiliency, cost and fulfillment. I also recommend that the consideration of resilience and agility is not to prevent the enterprise from being impacted by all known or unknown events, it is frequently to be FIRST in market recovery. Being first in servicing the market after an impact event can even positively increase profit and sales as we saw in some businesses in China during the 2020 Pandemic.

There are now additional enterprise protection responsibilities that go beyond continuing cost efficiencies and speed to market. Resilience and agility are now becoming major considerations in the performance assessment of the supply chain officer. The complexity of competitiveness, resilience and agility requires leadership and talent that have the capability to balance strategy and execution. They need to judge when to be reluctant and pragmatic vs. when to take acceptable risks. We measure these traits at RRA and have correlated with reasonable certainty that the ability of leaders to span these capabilities or traits and decide the best courses of actions is critical to chief officers success. Your enterprise plan for the future must address supply chain performance comprehensively in strategy, planning, execution and talent. Techniques may vary but leadership competency and leadership span does not.

The Enterprise Supply Chain Value Revolution

Download full article

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices