How Family Businesses Can Lead the Charge on Innovation | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Family Businesses Can Lead The Charge On Innovation

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationFamily BusinessTransformation and InnovationInnovation, Research, and Development

Article

September 30, 2021

4 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationFamily BusinessTransformation and InnovationInnovation, Research, and Development

Executive Summary

To advance innovation, family businesses should redefine tech leadership, build an inclusive culture, and consider external investment partners.

Close

Family businesses are surprisingly innovative. A recent analysis of research on global businesses between 1981 and 2012 found that for every dollar family-owned businesses invested in research and development, they gained more patents, more new products, and more revenues from those new ideas than other firms without family ownership.1

Notable examples include Herr’s Potato Chips, a small family business that introduces five to 10 new snacks annually, and W.L. Gore, maker of Gore-tex and other technical materials, which gives employees one afternoon per week to come up with new ideas.

Researchers view the family business innovation advantage as something that accrues over time. Since family businesses are managed and operated with a long-term perspective, later-generation family firms tend to be more innovative than other firms.2 This “innovation efficiency” has given family businesses a competitive edge, even as they address new business challenges such as technological changes, major health threats, and heightened scrutiny of diversity and inclusion.

Innovation efficiency does not mean family businesses are immune to disruption, however. As family businesses grow and evolve through this unprecedented business environment, how can they continue their legacy and differentiate themselves through innovation? Recent insights from Russell Reynolds Associates 2021 Global Leadership Monitor survey, which included 225 global family business leaders, suggest that they may need to reconsider how they bring new offerings to market, from revisiting investments and processes to taking a fresh look at diversity and inclusion.

Multi-faceted drivers of innovation

One way to continuously advance innovation is to align it with digital transformation, particularly in today’s pandemic-affected world. Organizations are increasingly embarking on the digital transformation journey, evaluating new digital technologies to help transform their business models. Yet this is an area where family business leaders appear to be somewhat behind. Less than a third (31%) of family businesses use digital technologies to launch new operational processes or new ways of working, compared to a 40% global average across all organizations.3

More generally, our data suggests that family businesses are less likely than others to take a continuous improvement approach to business. Currently, only 28% of family businesses are considering new ways to improve upon existing operations, compared to a 35% global average.4 This may stem from some of the unique characteristics of family businesses, such as deep appreciation for the founder’s vision, loyalty to tradition, and sharpened focus on the long-term journey.

Family businesses along the innovation journey

31%

28%

use digital technologies to launch new operational processes or new ways of working

are considering new ways to improve upon existing operations

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates, 2021 Global Leadership Monitor, base n = 225 global family business leaders

To advance innovation, organizations also need to ensure their cultures support it. Research increasingly shows that the ability to build diverse teams to encourage cross-pollination of different experiences and progressive perspectives is crucial to innovation outperformance. Ethnically diverse executive teams are 36% more likely to see top financial performance, according to recent McKinsey & Company research,5 and management teams with above-average diversity see innovation-related revenue that is 19 percentage points higher than leadership teams with below-average diversity, according to BCG.6

Here, too, family business leaders see their businesses as somewhat behind others. Just under half (45%) of family business executives report that their organization actively works to identify and amplify the voices of those with a different point of view, compared to 51% of executives across all organizations.7

Innovation pathways for family businesses

Three key approaches for family businesses to build up innovation capabilities for the next wave of change include redefining technology leadership capabilities, building an inclusive culture, and considering potential external investment partners.

01. Redefine technology leadership capabilities:

To support innovation through new digital and data capabilities, it is important to have a designated executive to help the business think strategically about its technology needs. Beyond the designated technology leader, the executive team should also be comprised of leaders who have an informed perspective on digitizing core functions such as finance, human resources, and supply chain. Having multiple tech-savvy board directors will help bolster efforts as well.

02. Build an inclusive culture:

Innovation thrives amidst diversity and multiplies within an inclusive culture. Important elements of an inclusive culture include cross-functional collaborations and data-driven decision-making processes. These characteristics can be quantified using climate, structure, and leadership metrics, to increase transparency and benchmark the organization’s levels of inclusion and belonging (see Figure 1)

Assessing the organization’s culture will be an ongoing, continuous journey, one that strategically evolves alongside the business model, to create the right foundation for new talent and capabilities.

Figure 1: Building an inclusive fosters belonging, leading to increased innovation

Climate

Structure

Leadership

Working across differences

Leveraging different perspectives

Workplace respect

Voice and influence

Employee recruitment, development & retention

Accommodating differences

Leadership commitment

Organizational fairness

03. Consider external investment partners:

One way to catalyze innovation is to bring in external viewpoints. For many family business leaders, taking on outside investors is a growing consideration. In a recent poll of middle-market family business owners, 87% expressed interest in this option.8 To the extent these investors include private equity firms, family businesses may see an innovation boost as well as a financial infusion.9 Partnering with private equity would bring family businesses exposure to new business perspectives and a faster pace of change, as 72% of private equity-backed executives say their leadership helps the organization adapt to disruptions in the industry, compared to just 58% of family businesses.10 It would also give family businesses the opportunity to develop digital capabilities – more than half (55%) of private equity-backed portfolio companies use digital technologies to launch new operational processes and/or ways of working, compared to just under a third (31%) of family businesses.11

Family businesses inherently possess an innovative nature. In order to capitalize on this and continue being competitive in the market, however, family businesses will need to re-examine their innovation capabilities with a fresh lens and identify forward-looking strategies to enable change and transformation.

Author

Joy Tan is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in New York City.

References

1, 2  Research: Family firms are more innovative than other companies. Kammerlander, Nadine and Marc van Essen. Harvard Business Review, January 25, 2017.

3, 4, 7, 10, 11 2021 Global Leadership Monitor: Leadership Preparedness for the Road Ahead. Crookes, Jemi, Tom Handcock, PJ Neal, Alix Stuart. Russell Reynolds Associates, May 4, 2021.

5 Diversity wins: How inclusion matters. Dixon-Fyle, Sundiatu, Kevin Dolan, Vivian Hunt, Sara Prince. McKinsey and Company, May 19, 2020.

6 How Diverse Leadership Teams Boost Innovation. Lorenzo, Rocío Nicole Voigt, Miki Tsusaka, Matt Krentz, and Katie Abouzahr. Boston Consulting Group, January 23, 2018.

8 How to partner with a private equity firm. Weinberg, Andrew. Forbes, February 25, 2021.

9 From trust to impact: why family businesses need to act now to ensure their legacy tomorrow. Bartels, Peter and Peter Englisch. PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2021.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices