An Industry in Full Disruption: How Digitization is Transforming MedTech | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

An Industry in Full Disruption: How Digitization is Transforming MedTech

Technology and InnovationHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Article

David Krahe

April 04, 2022

13 min

Technology and InnovationHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Executive Summary

Digitization is transforming the medical device industry, improving patient experiences via vast data collection and machine intelligence.

Close

David Krahe

Dallas

Digitization’s Impact: A Breaking Wave

Digitization has come (relatively) late to the medical devices
industry, but it is now here. Building since the beginning of
the last decade, breaking through with the crisis of COVID,
the ‘resultant vector’ of disruption will accelerate as we
move deeper into the 2020s.

The ultimate imperative is to have a leadership team in
place that can leverage innovative technologies within the
context of a broader strategic vision. Those stewarding
medtech companies will thus have to (often radically)
rethink their approach not just to technology, but to their
business models, talent, and transformation of mission and
culture.

Digitization will inexorably separate medtech companies
into ‘winners’ (those able to transform themselves internally
to differentiate their offerings in a dramatically expanded
market as they have the opportunity to become market
places with a suite of devices and a number of indication
areas) and those companies falling behind (who will either
be acquired or forced into transactional portions of the
value chain).

The key differentiator between market leaders and
also-rans will be visionary technology-savvy leaders
that are able to navigate a rapidly evolving market
landscape. They will understand the organization’s role in
a shifting ecosystem that features new competitors, new
stakeholders, and entirely new possibilities for connected
health care, particularly vis-à-vis reengineering the
experience of patients and leveraging their data to build
stronger partnerships with patients, payors and providers
(figure 1).

Figure 1: The migration of the medtech enterprise

“If you turn back the clock 5 or 10 years, a lot of medical device companies were
financially measured by the number of devices that they produced, put into the market,
sold, and the margins per device. Now the medical device companies are looking to
connect directly with their patients. They’re looking at not just creating a device that
addresses some kind of disease or condition, but more or less owning that condition.”

Chet Kolley, Group Vice President, Healthcare and Life Sciences Business, GlobalLogic

A Burning Platform for Industry Incumbents

The current market players are at a stark crossroads
where survival will mean adapting to an industry whose
accelerating velocity increasingly resembles that of
the technology sector. Medtech CEOs are publicly
committing to being among the first to complete this digital
transformation – showing that they’re putting enough force
behind it.

The window of time for companies to make this
transformation is closing; those legacy players that
simply attempt to consolidate existing profit pools will be
swamped by more tech-savvy competitors.

The current ‘core’ medical technology industry as of
2020/2021 has an estimated sales size of $400 billion
(figure 2). By 2030 the market is projected to double in
size, along with all-but-inevitable new market entrants.
Many of these new market entrants will help the ‘core’
medtech companies transform successfully, even further
differentiating the winners and fueling the war for talent.

Spurred by these ongoing disruptions, the flourishing
companies will be those agile enough to navigate
increasingly turbulent markets via five key capabilities:

01. Tapping into an Expanding and Evolving Ecosystem

02. Shifting to a Connected-Health Model

03. The War for (Technology) Talent

04. Flexible ‘Buy, Build or Partner’ Strategy

05. Digital Leadership: An Urgent C-suite Priority

Figure 2: Projected growth of the medtech landscape

Tapping into an
Expanding and
Evolving Ecosystem

The medtech landscape is changing around four themes:

Digital: There is a need for interconnectivity to become
a digitally enabled organization as well as to enhance
the enterprise through the increasing use of data;
Organizations are moving from backbone infrastructure
to using AI, data, analytics to influence the direction of
treatment.

Patient experience: Organizations need to understand
how data relates to better patient care as patients are
becoming more sophisticated and there is an increase in
focus on connectivity between health care providers and
patients. There is a need to develop IT solutions to allow
for this personalized level of care. Medtech organizations own the patient workflow and shift from a hospital
to a consumer orientation. Brand value will become
increasingly important as patients interact directly with an
organization’s digital platform.

Home care and hospitals: Where healthcare will occur is
changing:

Treatment is moving into the home expanding patient
pools through continuous care, wearables, and connected
devices.

The hospital footprint is moving away from chronic care to
a more acute setting. There is a need to integrate products
into hospital systems to improve care.

Data monetization: Companies see an increased demand
from the healthcare market to demonstrate clinical value
with analytics and there is a desire from organizations to
own and generate patient care data.

As the capabilities of the leading players in the medtech
industry expand, they will transform their relationships with
key stakeholders (figure 3), with opportunities increasing in
tandem with expectations.

Working with these stakeholders allows for synergistic
learnings across relationships and channels. Companies
that can leverage data for predictive/analytic capabilities
are poised to identify value-add opportunities across their
entire range of strategic partnerships. This begins with the
critical step of improving patient outcomes/adherence to
drive value to patients themselves as well as the health care
providers that serve them.

Direct interface with patients constitutes both a special
opportunity and a special problem: On the one hand, it
allows for leveraging of vital data flow along the value
chain, but it also places pressure on medtech providers to
provide value directly to patients through a B2C framework
for which they must fast-cycle specialized software
development and service.

“As to the power of data, now you’re
getting access to the aggregated data
set, which allows one to compare oneself
against an organized cohort. You can
glean what is normal vs abnormal. As
a patient-consumer, because you are
subscribing to access the information
that’s being gathered by the medtech
company, you have the power of insights
derived from these data sets for your
own health at your convenience...”

Sue Siegel, Board Member at Align, Illumina,
Nevro; Chairman, The Engine; Trustee, KFF

“The future is about connectivity and sharing of data. Products must be IoT-enabled - connected to the ecosystem they operate within and sharing data. The technology needs to be pervasive, intuitive, and interacting with its consumer in a non-intrusive, non-invasive way. The best products will be seamlessly embedded into life and will enhance our experiences.”

Raj Harapanahalli, Vice President, IT,
Innovations and Insights, Medtronic

“We went from being a medical device-only company to being a
medical device plus software plus analytics company.”

Jim Hollingshead, President, Sleep & Respiratory Care Business, ResMed

Figure 3: Expansion of organizational capabilities in relation to key stakeholders

Shifting to a Connected-Health Model

Technological capabilities have reached a critical mass on
multiple fronts, bringing a competitive advantage to any
medtech company that can effectively harness the data
with a focus on data interoperability as well as successful
AI/ML platforms.

To date, most of the hype around digital has focused on
AI/ML platforms that operate in siloes, which very few
companies have successfully built at scale. In addition,
organizations have traditionally underinvested in their data
foundation (data governance, quality, interoperability, etc.).

While key market players have become adept at the ‘legacy’
model of creating hardware and software products, many
leadership teams will experience difficulty with the change
management that is required to migrate to a frictionless
digital business platform, accelerate products’ time to
market, and build deep engagement across customers and
business partners.

This is especially true since a robust technology strategy
involves integrating three key elements: (1) transforming
patient experiences and improving patient outcomes to
(2) access vast arrays of patient data that can then (3) be
leveraged by AI/machine intelligence/algorithms to provide
‘virtuous circle’ feedback loops to add value to relationships
across the entire expanded ecosystem.

“When we went into the cloud
and put the activity on the cloud,
it completely changed the way
the industry treated patients.

In the sleep business, we now have this
number that blows my mind, because
we have had so many devices on the
market now. Since 2014, we have
twelve-and-a-half-billion nights of
data. We are using real-world evidence
to build the health economics models
to demonstrate that it does pay to
find and treat sleep apnea patients.”

Jim Hollingshead, President, Sleep & Respiratory Care Business, ResMed

The War for (Technology) Talent

Legacy medtech companies face the classic ‘how to build
the plane while it’s taking off’ problem. The central element
in any such solution is a transformed talent management
strategy, usually placing a premium on external hires,
particularly those with technology skills.

Coming out of the pandemic, the market for technology
talent is very frothy. Strong digital leaders receive daily
outreach from recruiters. A key to attracting technology
leaders is a public stance and commitment to the
digital transformation of the business—not just of the
organization’s technology leadership. In addition, it is
imperative to take advantage of the digital grounds in
your own company and identify talent that can quickly
take up these new technologies, business models, and
engagements.

Technology talent will look for organizations where their
talent, insight, and background are valued and recognized
(figure 4). In order to retain technology talent, organizations
need to provide this recognition as well as exciting career
options.

Although technology talent may be recruited, they can
only be retained if they feel part of an enterprise that
reflects their own values and visions. Technology leaders
should be empowered to have an instrumental role as
culture changers within the organization. In addition, both
the executive committee and the broader C-suite need to
demonstrate a full commitment—internally and externally—
that they are willing to change the organization’s culture.

The question for medtech companies is therefore how to
prepare a landing ground for new hires that either provides
them with the organizational culture they’re seeking or
allows them to participate in its creation to drive talent
retention and engagement.

“...there is an incredible rush to compete
with the tech world to hire some of
the most technically-savvy talent:
engineers, data scientists, AI/ML
experts, to mention a few. The scramble
to find that type of talent is real.
It affects the entire organization, from the
boardroom, all across the organization…
the culture of digital transformation,
particularly in a mature, analog-based
organization, has been and will continue
to be a continuous, full-time effort

Sue Siegel, Board Member at Align, Illumina,
Nevro; Chairman, The Engine; Trustee, KFF

“We ended up remodeling an entire
floor of our San Diego headquarters
because of the architectural layout of the
floor. It wasn’t open space, and it didn’t
look familiar to most of the software
engineers we were trying to hire.”

Jim Hollingshead, President, Sleep & Respiratory Care Business, ResMed

Figure 4: Mismatch between legacy medtech companies and digital talent

A Flexible ‘Buy, Build, or Partner’ Strategy

Even the most agile medtech company is unlikely to achieve
its ambitions solely through organic growth; there are good
reasons why M&A activity in this sector is now approaching
frenzied levels.

Such M&A deals aren’t just about the formal IP, they’re
about the talent, as acquiring that talent within its own
natural ecosystem is sometimes the only way to harness its
full value.

The optimal strategy for many companies is likely to
be a hybrid model of in-house incubators and external
acquisitions, either integrated or held at arm’s length from
the legacy enterprise (figure 5).

However, it’s not just black or white with regards to
organic and inorganic growth. It is equally important
to build an effective ecosystem that surrounds the
company. The edges of the company boundaries fluctuate
and are becoming grayer as the number of partners of
the organization expands. Key to the strategy here is
OpenAPI that will allow your ecosystem to add services
on the platforms for better customer engagement and
satisfaction.

Indeed, many companies are opting for an explicit ‘two-track’
model whereby the core and the frontier businesses
are managed under different sets of expectations, in
particular with regards to speed-to-market.

“The talent war will intensify, as will the
M&A hunt. Most companies will seek
to stand up a hybrid business model
on their digital transformation journey.
They’ll go from hardware to adding
services to then adding content/data
plays, like Apple has done so brilliantly.
Boards and executives who embrace
that this is the future of medtech’s
value expansion will create healthy
TSR while providing solutions to
patients, providers, and payors through
digitally engaging user experience.

Sue Siegel, Board Member at Align, Illumina,
Nevro; Chairman, The Engine; Trustee, KFF

Figure 5: Hybrid strategy for digital transformation in medtech

Digital Leadership: An
Urgent C-suite Priority

All of these factors—the technology, the talent needed
to steer that technology, the reengineered relationships
with patients, the more expansive approach to the market
ecosystem—will depend on the caliber of the leadership
stewarding this transition.

Successful leadership teams will be those able to ask
hard questions regarding their own capabilities: for many
such teams, the key insight they will bring to this industry
disruption is the recognition that they don’t have the
entirety of the expertise required; this may be particularly
true at the board level, which might need to diversify its
knowledge base and actively seek out the ‘digital native’
perspective in its deliberations.

In the intensifying scramble for leadership talent, fast-cycling
of succession planning/ finding ‘force multiplier’
internal moves will be vital, but most companies will also
have to aggressively go external to seed their leadership
with hires directly from (adjacent or otherwise) technology
sectors.

Organizations will need talent that is willing and able to
challenge the organization with the ability to break some
glass to change the organizational mindset and culture. One
individual will not be able to lead the transition alone – it
needs to be a broad-based organizational reckoning and
passion instilled from the top and driven by the board and
C-suite.

“You might be able to put what you
believe to be the toolsets in place to
enable that digital transformation to
occur, but without the appropriate culture
from leadership, how many have actually
really done it in the medtech space?”

Sue Siegel, Board Member at Align, Illumina,
Nevro; Chairman, The Engine; Trustee, KFF

“More and more you see a CEO,
or executives with titles like chief
digital officer; it’s really become
a prominent part of the company
strategy: the way they go to market,
the way they differentiate themselves,
the way they build relationships
directly with the people whom they
consider their stakeholders with
whatever business that they do.”

Chet Kolley, Group Vice President, Healthcare
and Life Sciences Business, GlobalLogic

“For the C-suite, it is of paramount
importance for medical device players
to move in this direction. It will take
some time to have that restructuring
occurring. The risk of not starting down
that path now is that there will not be
a lot of fast followers. The company
that is ahead will stay ahead. If you
don’t start in the next year, you will be
behind and not be able to catch up.”

David Feygin, Vice President, IT and Chief
Digital Health Officer, Boston Scientific

Questions for the Board/C-suite

Do we have a digitally-savvy leadership team to support our digital agenda?

Do we have capabilities at the C-suite level and within the board to steer the enterprise through the next industry
transition into new business models?

If not, how do we get those capabilities?

How do we organize ourselves around our digital agenda?

How do we scale our many digital initiatives or ‘1000 flowers blooming’?

How do we leverage the groundswell in our organization?

Do we need more digitally-savvy board directors?

Do we need a chief digital/technology officer?

How do we become a magnet for digital talent?

Are our next generation of leaders ‘digitally conversant’?

How do we take advantage of the fact that the next generation of leaders have grown up in a completely digital world?

Do we have the feedback loops and a mindset in place to ensure the organization doesn’t ‘tune out’ (and force out) new
hires who get it?

To what extent are we hardwiring comfort with ambiguity into ongoing leadership development programs?

Authors

Wolfgang Bauriedel is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’
Technology sector. He is based in Boston.
David Krahe is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Medical Devices
and Diagnostics practice. He is based in Dallas.
Sarah Flören is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare sector.
She is based in Amsterdam.

An Industry In Full Disruption

How Digitization Is Transforming MedTech

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices