Next-Generation Sustainable Board Directors | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Next-Generation Sustainable Board Directors

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

Kurt Harrison

June 16, 2022

12 min

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

A new breed of sustainable board directors bring valuable track record of commercial success combined with a sustainable mindset.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

Consider the range of geopolitical shocks businesses have been forced to respond in the first half of 2022: a ground war in Europe, soaring inflation, global energy price shocks, collapsing equity markets, crucial supply chain disruptions, climate change-related natural disasters — all amidst a lingering global pandemic.

The litany of simultaneous global crises has caused some market participants to feel that sustainability should take a back seat to more pressing issues. Mark Carney, the globally recognized UN climate envoy and head of transition investing at Brookfield, conceded that there will need to be continued investment in fossil fuels to facilitate the eventual transition to renewable energy.1 Even BlackRock, which has long been a champion of ESG integration, recently announced that they would be ratcheting back their support for environmental and social shareholder proposals, some of which they say are “implicitly intended to micromanage companies.”2

We agree with BlackRock’s recent pronouncement — some activist investors are indeed using an ESG cloak to disguise ulterior motives. A number of aggressive environmental activists are proposing measures that are diametrically opposed to companies’ commercial interests. Yet predictions that the importance of ESG and sustainability will begin to fade away are both simplistic and premature. Rather, what we are witnessing is a natural evolution as businesses more meaningfully grapple with what it means to truly embed sustainability as a business strategy – and not a marketing gimmick.

“I think people are mistaking the stakeholder capitalism thing for being woke…. All we’re saying is when we wake up in the morning, what we [care] about is serving customers, earning their respect, earning their repeat business.”3

Jamie Dimon,
CEO of JP Morgan Chase

The last several years have proven that sustainability is neither a gimmick nor even a “nice to have” – rather, it has become a fundamental strategic pillar for any best-in-class organization. Companies that have integrated sustainability into the core of their business have a significant competitive advantage, benefitting from improved brand equity, greater share of customer wallet, attracting and retaining next generation talent, future-proofing their supply chain, and complying with ever more stringent regulatory requirements. As Jamie Dimon and several other enlightened CEOs have stated, sustainability and ESG are not the enemy of the shareholder, but a tool for value creation of all types – financial, social and environmental. While CEO support is crucial, the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that companies reap these benefits lies squarely within the purview of a company’s most senior decision-makers: the board.

“In the United States, there is still a debate in board circles about whether sustainability even does rest in the boardroom or whether it’s solely a management issue. Our view is if it’s a significant or a material driver of value or risk, then it rests in the boardroom.”4

Michelle Edkins,
Managing Director, BlackRock Investment Stewardship

The recent media confusion and misdirection around sustainability has prompted several false narratives. Among them is the notion that boards do not need or want “sustainable directors,” often depicted as radical advocates caring only about environmental and/or social issues, to the detriment of the commercial success of the company.

This argument is being disproven in real time, as a new breed of sustainable board directors are being sought after by best-in-class companies around the world. These directors bring a valuable executive acumen as business leaders with a track record of commercial success, combined with a sustainable mindset that enables them to identify risks and opportunities that others may miss. While they may come from a range of backgrounds, they share a capacity for delivering commercial value across social, environmental and financial dimensions for the companies they govern.

Board Composition – Change is Needed

PwC’s 2021 Annual Corporate Directors Survey revealed that only 25% of directors report that their board understands ESG risks very well. Similarly, the NYU Stern Center for Sustainable Business assessed the credentials of 1188 Fortune 100 board directors and found that only about 1% possessed expertise in any environmental field, including energy, conservation, climate and sustainable development.5

“Today’s boards are just not equipped to deal with today’s challenges. They don’t reflect the real world anymore. The world has moved on, and, frankly, many of the boards have not moved on in ESG…and climate knowledge. We have a problem…that with the urgency that we need to act right now, boards might become a bottleneck.”

Paul Polman,
Former CEO of Unilever

It is evident that the current generation of board directors does not possess meaningful technical expertise when it comes to managing sustainability risks and opportunities. While such technical expertise may not be a prerequisite for success, boards going forward will require directors who combine a sustainable mindset with a track record of commercial success in order to provide strategic guidance as to how to maximize social, environmental and financial value creation. As with other macro considerations that are material to the business – digital transformation, and inclusion, among others – board composition will need to evolve to face future challenges, as well as present ones.

Rather than seeking to add “single issue directors” who bring a narrow set of technical skills, boards should seek next-generation sustainable board directors who possess the differentiating attributes below, underpinned by a track record of commercial success. This model of the sustainable leader was developed by Russell Reynolds Associates in partnership with the United Nations Global Compact and resulted from an in-depth global study of 55 board directors and CEOs with a track record of successfully integrating sustainability into business strategy.

Three Archetypes of Next-Generation Sustainable Board Directors

“When it comes to demonstrating clear fluency or operational experience in sustainability matters, our observation is that there is a generational shift happening in boardrooms, and more of the newer directors, including first-time directors, have had more hands-on experience in their operational executive roles on sustainability-related matters, as those matters have risen up the corporate agenda.”6

Michelle Edkins,
Managing Director, BlackRock Investment Stewardship

Now that we have identified the attributes of a sustainable executive, boards may next ask where they might find such leaders? While there are many paths to the development of a sustainable mindset and the attributes above, our experience working with leading companies to appoint directors has highlighted three templates of the next-generation sustainable board director:

CEO or C-Suite Executives who have led a sustainable business transformation and/or come from a best-in-class sustainable company

Chief Sustainability Officers who have embedded sustainability while generating value and inspiring stakeholders across the organization

Commercially-minded executive professionals coming from government, NGOs, or academia who understand the interconnectedness and complexity of global sustainability challenges and opportunities

Let’s review some recent appointments of these next-generation sustainable board directors to see how the attributes of a sustainable leader play out across the three archetypes:

CEO or C-suite Executives

Beth Ford
President and CEO, Land O’Lakes, Inc.
Current Board Member, BlackRock, appointed September 2021

Beth Ford is the president and chief executive officer of Land O’Lakes, Inc., a Fortune 200 food production and agribusiness company that has pioneered industry-leading on-farm sustainability assessments that provides farmer-members with actionable insights to improve efficiency and reduce their environmental footprint. Ford is an inclusive leader who can bring alignment across diverse stakeholder views – as she has done leading Land O’Lakes’ nearly 100-year-old farmer and local retailer-owned cooperative. She sits on the board of directors for the Business Roundtable, the Fortune 150 company PACCAR, Inc., and other industry, non-profit and university boards. She has been recognized by Fortune as one of the World’s 50 Greatest Leaders and Most Powerful Women.

Gregory J. Goff
Former Chief Executive Officer, Andeavor
Current Board Member, ExxonMobil, appointed July 2021

Gregory Goff has a long track record of success spanning more than 40 years of energy experience holding various leadership positions, with his longest tenure being at ConocoPhillips. Goff served as CEO (2010-2018) and chairman (2014-2018) of Andeavor, a leading petroleum refining and marketing company formerly known as Tesoro Corp. There, Goff led a financial transformation generating total returns of over 1,200% versus 55% for the U.S. Energy sector. Named by Harvard Business Review as one of the “Best-Performing CEOs in the World” in 2018, Goff is a leader that can rigorously drive concerted action and investments in pursuit of ambitious targets.

Kaisa Helena Hietala
Former Executive Vice President of Renewable Products, Neste
Current Board Member, ExxonMobil, appointed July 2021

Kaisa Hietala has more than 20 years of strategic and operational experience in the energy sector, beginning her career in upstream oil and gas exploration and crude oil trading. As former executive vice president of renewable products at Neste, Hietala was able to grow the renewable products segment’s revenue by 1.6x and operating profits by 4x to over $1 billion. She helped transform Neste into the world’s largest and most profitable producers of renewable diesel and renewable jet fuel, leading to what the Harvard Business Review named one of the “Top 20 Business Transformations of the Last Decade” in 2019.

Chief Sustainability Officers

Dane Parker
Former Chief Sustainability Officer, General Motors
Current Board Member, Sphera Solutions, appointed January 2022

As chief sustainability officer for one of the world’s largest automakers, Parker helped drive GM’s commitment to carbon neutrality by 2040 and towards electrification of the vehicle fleet.
His other global responsibilities included overseeing as $4 billion P&L across facility design, engineering, construction and operations, energy procurement and efficiency, environmental compliance, real estate and workplace strategy. Prior to GM, Dane was vice president of global real estate, facilities and environment, health and safety, for Dell, Inc. Dane also spent more than 13 years at Intel Corporation in the Technology and Manufacturing organization in a variety of operational roles.

Jackie Roberts
Former Chief Sustainability Officer, Carlyle Group
Current Board Member at Alcoa, appointed May 2022

Jackie Roberts is chief sustainability officer of AppHarvest, a B-Corp certified sustainable food company in Appalachia developing and operating some of the world’s largest high-tech indoor farms. She was appointed to the board of Alcoa in May 2022. Prior to joining AppHarvest, Roberts held various executive roles at the Carlyle Group, a global diversified investment firm, including as chief sustainability officer (2014-2019) and managing director (2019-2020). Roberts also held various positions, including senior director, over her seventeen years with the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF). While at EDF, she was awarded the White House Presidential Environment and Conservation Challenge Award in 1991, for the creation of a partnerships program to help reduce environmental impact at companies such as McDonald’s, Starbucks and FedEx.

Pia Heidenmark Cook
Former Chief Sustainability Officer, Ingka Group (IKEA)
Current Board Member, Bupa, Origin Materials and MAX Burgers

Pia Heidenmark Cook was chief sustainability officer (CSO) at Ingka Group (IKEA) between 2017-2021. IKEA is the world’s leading home furnishing retailer set out to become a people and planet positive business. Cook led a team of sustainability professionals in the global office, as well as sustainability experts integrated across the retail, shopping Centre and customer fulfilment business across 30 markets in Europe, Asia Pacific and North America, and was a member of the executive retail management team. Before that, she was head of sustainability in the largest business division, IKEA Group Retail & Expansion, embedding sustainability in IKEAs retail operations and securing a more sustainable offer to IKEA customers. She was, for several years (ended in 2017), co-chair of REAP (Retailers Environmental Action Programme) together with a member of the EU Commission.

Strategy/Policy/Academia

George Serafeim
Current Professor of Business Administration, Harvard Business School
Current Board Member, Liberty Mutual, appointed April 2021

As a professor at Harvard Business School and world-renowned expert in ESG investing, Serafeim has the financial mindset but also strong strategic perspective on how material ESG factors that drive value creation should be identified and measured. He was recently appointed as an independent director of Liberty Mutual, a leading global property and casualty insurer that is increasingly exposed to global weather-driven losses and has set an ESG ambition to advance resilience and inclusive growth. Given his academic background and the wide array of research he has published on ESG, Serafeim has the ability to dive into the details of Liberty Mutual’s assessments of ESG risks and opportunities while also retaining the big picture and being aware of the wider, more complex systems that may be at play. With increasing regulatory reporting and market frameworks emerging, a sustainability-minded director must be able to hold management accountable in achieving ambitious climate targets and ensuring compliance.

Alexander Karsner
Current Senior Strategist, X (formerly Google X)
Current Board Member, ExxonMobil, appointed July 2021

Alexander Karsner is an accomplished energy industry entrepreneur and policymaker with more than three decades of global conventional and renewable energy experience. He began his career developing and financing large scale energy infrastructure, and as a private equity investor, venture partner, and advisor, his portfolios have included some of the most successful cleantech startups of the past decade. He previously served as U.S. Assistant Secretary of Energy, responsible for multi-billion dollar federal R&D programs. He is senior strategist at X (formerly Google X), the innovation lab of Alphabet Inc., and a Precourt Energy Scholar at Stanford University’s School of Civil and Environmental Engineering.

Lise Kingo
Former Chief Executive Officer, United Nations Global Compact (UNGC)
Current Board Member, Covestro, appointed April 2021

Kingo spent 26 years at Novo Nordisk, where she served as chief of staff, executive vice president and a member of the executive management team since 2002, and was instrumental in defining their sustainable business strategy. Most recently, King served as CEO of the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC), the world’s largest corporate sustainability initiative calling on companies to align their strategies and operations with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). She understands that to catalyze effective action, we will require proactive stakeholder inclusion from all facets of the world – business, government, cities, consumers.

Conclusion

While most corporate boards have traditionally been composed of retired CEOs and qualified financial experts, new experiential dimensions such as digital expertise, cybersecurity and DE&I have become hallmarks of good governance. Similarly,  ESG fluency is becoming an important board composition requirement, as it becomes a critical pillar of any organization’s corporate strategy, risk management and regulatory compliance framework.

As issues around climate change, racial and social injustice, and global pandemics become business and humanitarian issues, they will demand a business response. Companies that fail to incorporate these global themes into their corporate strategy are positioned for almost certain failure. Next generation corporate boards must include sustainable mindsets to future-proof their organizations against these threats, while simultaneously seizing upon the value creation opportunities.

Authors

Kurt Harrison co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Practice.  He is based in New York.
Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Practice Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.
Sylwia Zieba is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Practice. She is based in New York.
Vanessa Di Matteo is a member of the Knowledge team for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability Practice. She is based in London.

In the UK, RRA recently signed up with Chapter Zero to a commitment to evaluate all non-executive candidates for their motivation and capabilities around sustainability – and climate change in particular. More information is available at: Leading search firms sign joint declaration on climate capabilities in the boardroom - chapterzero

1 Mark Carney, “Financing the Net Zero Revolution”, Net Zero Delivery Summit, May 11 2022 Financing-the-Net-Zero-Revolution_NZDS-Speech-by-Mark-Carney.pdf (bbhub.io)
2 Catherine Clifford, “Blackrock to vote for fewer climate shareholder provisions in 2022 than 2021”, CNBC May 11 2022 Blackrock to vote for fewer climate provisions in 2022 than 2021 (cnbc.com)

3 https://www.ft.com/content/14fcf2be-067d-49e3-ae6d-814dd6a35abf
4 Chrissa Pagitsas, 2022. "Chief Sustainability Officers At Work," Springer Books, Springer, number 978-1-4842-7866-6, June.
5 Tensie Whelan, “U.S. Corporate Boards Suffer From Inadequate Expertise in Financially Material ESG Matters”, NYU Stern Center for Sustainable Business, January, 2021 U.S. Corporate Boards Suffer From Inadequate Expertise in Financially Material ESG Matters.docx (2.13.21).pdf (nyu.edu)

6 Chrissa Pagitsas, 2022. "Chief Sustainability Officers At Work," Springer Books, Springer, number 978-1-4842-7866-6, June.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices