Portfolio Company CFOs: Rethinking the Hiring Blueprint | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Portfolio Company CFOs: Rethinking the Hiring Blueprint

FinanceLeadership StrategiesPortfolio Company LeadershipSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalProfessional Services

Article

May 31, 2022

9 min

FinanceLeadership StrategiesPortfolio Company LeadershipSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalProfessional Services

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In an increasingly competitive CFO market, PE firms must think holistically about their portfolio company finance teams to unlock new talent.

Close

Linda Barham

Chicago

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Jim Lawson

New York

The private equity portfolio CFO market is becoming increasingly
competitive due to the recent volume and high valuation of private
equity transactions. Investors and portfolio company CEOs are
fighting for external talent, with increased expectation post-investment
of prior private equity experience. The solution to the
talent war for private equity CFOs, may lie in the success public
companies have recently had in succession planning efforts.

To better understand Chief Financial Officer hiring trends in the United States’
private equity landscape, Russell Reynolds Associates mapped 17 mid-cap to
mega-cap private equity firms’ portfolio companies (see appendix for full list).
Analyzing a representative 150 portfolio companies or 20% of the firms’ portfolio
companies across sectors, we investigated the portfolio company CFO’s journey
to the top.

Our findings suggest that private equity firms can bring in the next generation of
portfolio CFOs by rethinking:

Which competencies and experiences are critical to success in the role.

Which criteria are preventing them from improving
diversity hiring and reducing recruitment costs.

To create new talent pools in an increasingly tapped market, private equity
firms should look holistically across their portfolio companies’ in-house
finance talent and invest in the next generation leaders through career
development through coaching, role rotation, enhanced scope of role and
retention efforts.

While investors believe the quality of the
executive team is more important than business
fundamentals, CFO turnover is still high

Hire new or keep the existing CFO?

According to Russell Reynolds’ Evolving Expectations of Portfolio Company CFOs Survey, leading US private equity
investors believe the quality of talent on the portfolio leadership team outweighs the fundamentals of the business when it
comes to maximizing returns.¹ In other words, the CFO is key to unlocking value. This results in many PE firms preemptively
replacing company CFO post-investment, especially if an IPO is on the horizon.

Of the portfolio company CFOs RRA mapped, 71% hired a
new CFO post-investment, and over 80% were hired within
four years of the first deal. With the majority of investors
searching for a new CFO, the market is especially tight,
when on average, portfolio companies have as many CFOs
as deals (e.g., two CFOs, two deals). To unlock talent,
investors need to think about their hiring strategy. Is it wiser
to buy in the short-term, or build for the long-term across
portfolio companies?

Figure 1: % Portfolio Company CFOs That Hire a New CFO Post-investment or Keep The Existing CFO

The high rate of CFO turnover post-investment coupled
by the lack of internal talent in the market, reiterates the
importance of why investors need to focus on the talent
of the leadership team. In addition, we found a positive
correlation between size of PE fund and turnover rates.
Portfolio companies of mega-cap firms ($100-500 billion
AUM) are the most likely to replace their CFO postinvestment,
with 42% of these companies having had 3
or more CFOs on average within the first 5 years post-investment
(Figure 2). This suggests that larger portfolio
companies seek CFOs with specific experiences as the
company scales, such as private equity or IPO exposure.

Figure 2: Number of Portfolio Company CFOs by Private Equity Fund Size

New portfolio company CFOs have more private equity
experience

Half of private equity investors surveyed cited previous PE experience as “very to extremely important” for a portfolio
company CFO to have.¹ Portfolio CFO hiring trends follow suit—new CFOs brought on board post-investment are 13% more
likely to have private equity CFO experience and/or previous private equity experience than existing CFOs (see Figure 3.)

Figure 3: Private Equity Experience

IPO experience remains important, yet elusive, in the CFO talent pool. 82% of investors surveyed prefer a CFO with previous
IPO experience,¹ yet only 15% actually have said experience. Of that 15%, 68% are new CFOs placed post-investment. The
large and mega-cap funds are most successful at placing CFOs with IPO experience, again highlighting the importance of
certain experiences for the large and mega-cap funds’ portfolio companies.

Portfolio company CFOs: a
fight for external talent

Public and private equity companies are increasingly competing for talent, with portfolio companies offering larger equity
deals. However public companies are increasingly promoting from within, while portfolio companies continue to look
externally for experienced talent. It’s time for private equity firms to consider that the portfolio company hiring blueprint
might be limiting their search for great CFO talent.

Previous CFO experience

57% of portfolio CFOs have previous “top-seat” CFO experience — the majority of which have spent time at a portfolio
company — while only 41% of S&P 500 have previous experience (Figure 4.) With the resources to develop a robust finance
team internally, S&P 500 companies can succession plan accordingly, while portfolio companies aiming for a successful
exit either don’t have a succession plan in place or can’t afford to wait for it to come to fruition, forcing them to rely on
external candidates with previous CFO experience.

Figure 4: Portfolio Company Previous CFO Experience

Internal versus external

As shown in Figure 5, over 80% of portfolio company
CFOs are external hires, more than double the number
of externally hired new S&P 500 CFOs. While public
companies are starting to see the payoff of succession
planning, many portfolio companies don’t have the luxury
of deeply seeded talent on their bench. Another factor
impacting portfolio companies bench strength is the lack
of equity for more junior talent on the team - without equity
incentives, developing and retaining top talent is difficult.

Figure 5: Portfolio Company CFOs: Internal versus External Hire

Next-
Generation:
make tradeoffs
to open the
talent aperture

The next generation of CFO talent has arrived to the S&P 500, with 59% of new CFOs in the role for the first time, versus
43% of new portfolio company CFOs. While more than nine out of 10 first time CFO S&P 500 candidates are promoted
internally, as previously mentioned, portfolio companies don’t have the same abundant supply of internal talent. 65%
of portfolio first time CFOs are externally hired, compared to only 8% of new externally hired S&P 500 CFOs (Figure
6.). Given the abundant supply of first time public company CFOs, PE funds should look at the senior finance talent of
developmentally focused public companies to broaden the narrow talent pool.

Figure 6: First Time CFOs Internal versus External Appointments

While they might not have been in seat before, considering first time CFOs can offer other benefits, including increased
candidate pool gender and ethnic diversity. There is still much work to be done to achieve parity within the CFO ranks
and portfolio companies have a longer road ahead, with 36% less women CFOs than public companies. Private equity
firms should take note, especially if an IPO is on the horizon, as scrutiny surrounding gender diversity will increase and the
business benefits provided by a diverse organization are numerous. Considering first time CFOs and developing internal
talent by providing critical finance experiences to underrepresented minorities are a few of the many steps that can be
taken to improve diversity. In fact, 17% of externally hired portfolio first time CFOs are women, compared to only 7% of
experienced portfolio CFOs. Additionally, the majority of first time CFOs (52%) have previous private equity experience to
offer.

Portfolio and public CFOs follow
similar routes to the top

Though portfolio CFOs are hired externally and with more sitting CFO experience than new S&P 500 CFOs, their career
paths are largely the same. Portfolio CFOs are on average four years younger than public company CFOs, but have the
same ratio of MBAs and CPAs to their names, and follow the same route to the top.

Journey to the Top Seat

Around 80% of both listed and portfolio CFOs were in traditional finance roles before their first CFO roles, such as chief
accounting officer or divisional CFO. It’s worth noting that almost 20% of CFOs come from non-finance roles, such as a
vice president of strategy, chief operating officer, or a divisional CEO role. This is also becoming more common among S&P
500 CFOs. Interestingly, as shown in Figure 7, six times more portfolio company CFOs come from a corporate development
background, likely due to private equity experience or operating in a smaller company where M&A is not a separate
function.

Figure 7: Role prior to first CFO role

Key functional tenure differs more between portfolio company CFOs and S&P 500 CFOs, explainable by public company
CFOs being older and often having longer careers. Consequentially, we see S&P 500 CFOs have more than three times as
many years of non-finance experience, and almost two times as many years of accounting/controls experience. On average,
portfolio company CFOs have 23.3 years of finance experience and have predominantly focused on finance operations
(including FP&A, VP finance, CFO, and division/regional CFO roles), which remains the most obvious background of a
portfolio company CFO, consistent with public company CFOs.

Figure 8: Average years experience by function

Recommendations: Think
holistically about your portfolio

To adapt to an increasingly competitive market, the blueprint for hiring portfolio CFOs needs to change. With the majority
of private equity firms hiring new portfolio company CFOs post-investment, experienced CFOs will only become rarer. For
a competitive advantage and recruitment-saving costs, private equity firms need to start thinking holistically about their
portfolio company finance teams to build and unlock new talent.

Strengthen near-term succession
planning

While the S&P 500 continues to make
progress on succession planning,
portfolio companies continue to look
externally for experienced CFOs in an
incredibly tight talent market. From the
start of the deal, invest in the whole
finance team and develop a succession
plan at least three years before the
CFO is expected to change to ensure
a smooth exit. Look beyond each
portfolio company’s finance team and
holistically consider all finance teams
by applying a consistent leadership
assessment process on externally
recruited talent to baseline their
aptitude for broader portfolio finance
roles. Investing and developing across
portfolio companies allows private
equity firms to unlock new talent
pipelines.

First time CFOs

If they are good enough for the S&P
500, why not for portfolio companies?
Not only are they viable candidates,
but the majority of these first time
CFO candidates (52%) also bring
private equity experience and a
source of gender diversity, which
should be a key priority for private
equity firms. Applying the “build-notbuy”
approach to all your portfolio
companies unlocks new opportunities
for next-generation CFO leadership.
Consider what in-house coaching or
external development programs may
exist and plan for your finance team’s
development.

Reallocate recruitment savings to
increase talent equity

By thinking holistically about your
overall finance talent, there is potential
to save on recruitment costs. However,
funds will need to be allocated
elsewhere to attract and retain top
finance talent. To retain finance bench
strength across portfolio companies,
re-evaluate the equity and LTIP
associated with your number two roles.
Ask: is it a career, when there are no
development opportunities or equity,
or is it just a job?

Authors

Linda Barham leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ America’s Financial Officers
practice. She is based in Chicago.
Jenna Fisher co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Financial Officers
practice. She is based in San Francisco.
Jim Lawson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Financial Officers
practice. He is based in New York.
Catherine Schroeder is a member of is Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial
Officers practice knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

Portfolio Company CFOs: Rethinking the Hiring Blueprint

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices