Climate Action: CEOs Say They’re Doing All They Can. Employees Disagree | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Climate Action: CEOs Say They’re Doing All They Can. Employees Disagree

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Article

Sarah Galloway

November 19, 2021

5 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Close

Sarah Galloway

London

Corporations were very visible during the recent COP negotiations, touting their green credentials and their drive to net zero. According to the U.N., to achieve the goal of keeping global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, “every company, every financial firm, every bank, insurer, and investor will need to change.”

So are business leaders and companies up to the challenge? Yes — but not yet. Recent sustainability research shows that a majority of businesses lack integrated strategies for combating climate change; leaders lack sustainability experience, responsibilities, and training; and employees lack a clear understanding of the organization’s actions and impact.

The Say/Do Divide on Environmental Action

Despite the urgent need for businesses to help address escalating environmental crises, climate change has not become a top priority for a vast majority of those occupying the corner office. Only 25% of C-suite leaders globally say climate change, rising sea levels or extreme weather events are critical existential threats to their corporate strategy. Just 43% say their organizations have sustainability strategies in place that have been acted upon and clearly communicated. And only a nominal 19% say sustainability metrics are linked to external reporting frameworks.

Our research also revealed a significant “Say-Do” divide between what CEOs say they are doing on environmental issues and what employees see them do.

While 79% of C-suite leaders say their organizations’ environmental practices are in line with industry best practices, just 54% of employees say the same.

While 78% of C-suite leaders say their organizations are doing all they can on climate change, only 53% of employees agree.

While 73% of C-suite leaders say that their organizations place the same importance on sustainability as they do on profits, only 48% of employees say the same.

Notably, employees are more likely to see their organizations carry out “bolt-on” environmental initiatives. In our study, 64% of employees said their organizations were taking action to reduce waste (e.g. recycling, less packaging, reusing materials), while 68% said their organizations were relying on digital technologies to reduce paper use. This indicates that the majority of leaders are ticking boxes with tactical environmental-related actions, rather than viewing sustainability as a fundamental driver of business strategy. As Alan Jope, CEO at Unilever, writes in the foreword to Divides and Dividends, “Sustainable business isn’t a strategic priority. It is our strategy. It is our priority.”4

One barrier to holistically integrating sustainability across business strategy is that only a minority of C-suite leaders have carried out additional sustainability-related responsibilities in the past two years—whether that is changing internal processes to improve environmental or social outcomes (29%), identifying new approaches to make their products or workplace more sustainable (28%), changing supplier selection to improve environmental or social outcomes (25%) or completing an academic study or a qualification with an emphasis on environmental or social sustainability (23%). Furthermore, just 28% have received training on environmental or social sustainability issues.

As the climate crisis takes center stage, businesses will have to get their acts together or risk the loss of customers and investors, and the depreciation of equity and reputation. On the upside, leaders who bridge the divides that threaten our global societies will yield significant triple-line dividends. Anjali Bansal, the founder of Avaana Capital, recently told us “Climate change is impacting every single sphere of our life, every single society, every single country. Leaders have a big responsibility to act today to ensure that we leave a healthier planet for the next generation. And through different business models, through innovation-led business models, we have a real opportunity to do that.”

Interestingly, our research indicated significant regional variations in how companies view sustainability priorities. As the current holder of the COP26 Presidency, the UK is among the world’s leaders in its concern for climate change. When we asked survey respondents about the most important sustainability issues affecting the future of our society, 40% of UK C-suite leaders put climate change at the top of the list. The global average was 29%. Conversely, just 17% of C-suite leaders in Canada and 21% of C-suite leaders in Australia cited climate change as a top societal challenge.

To determine how your market or industry fared, we have developed an interactive Divides and Dividends website5 to produce customized reports by sector, country, and cohort—including demographic breakdowns—with the extensive data generated by this unprecedented research. The report also enables leaders to address the challenges and grasp this opportunity by providing:

An understanding of the environmental, social, and economic divides facing businesses, their implications, and action items to address

Methodologies to strategically advance a sustainability agenda

A roadmap to delivering lasting value for people, planet, and profit

As the climate crisis takes center stage, businesses will have to get their acts together or risk the loss of customers and investors, and the depreciation of equity and reputation. On the upside, leaders who bridge the divides that threaten our global societies will yield significant triple-line dividends.

This article was originally featured on BRINK.

1. Introduction - UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) at the SEC – Glasgow 2021 (ukcop26.org)
2. COP26 Goals - UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) at the SEC – Glasgow 2021 (ukcop26.org)
3. COP26-Explained.pdf (ukcop26.org)
4. Divides and Dividends | Russell Reynolds Associates
5. Divides and Dividends | Russell Reynolds Associates Divides and Dividends: Leadership Actions for a More Sustainable Future, surveyed employees, next-generation leaders, and C-suite executives across 11 countries in growth and mature markets. The study examines how the global workforce views, experiences and prioritizes the most important challenges affecting society, businesses and workers.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices