The Great Resignation: Challenges, Opportunities, and Leadership Implications | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Great Resignation: Challenges, Opportunities, and Leadership Implications

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsExecutive Search

Article

December 13, 2021

7 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsExecutive Search

Executive summary

Evidence of high attrition levels induced by COVID-era fatigue (and a concern of more to come) creates important questions for leaders.

Close

The “great resignation” has become the moniker for two phenomena – increased numbers of employees quitting their jobs voluntarily (usually to take on another job elsewhere), and a sense of a looming wave of attrition driven by COVID-era induced burnout and disengagement within the workforce.

Leaders are concerned, we hear it in our conversations and see it in our data. Our Global Leadership Monitor, which tracks top executive priorities, found that availability of key talent and skills was the second most important external factor (behind uncertain economic growth) that executives across the globe believe will impact their organization’s health over the next 12-18 months.  Critically it was the top issue that they were least likely to feel prepared to face – close to half of leaders do not believe their leadership team is prepared to address the issue, well behind most other issues we tracked.

This concern is well placed.  Evidence of the great resignation is robust. McKinsey’s analysis found that 40% of employees say that they are at least somewhat likely to leave their current job in the next 3-6 months.  Furthermore, 53% of talent management professionals reported that they are experiencing greater voluntary turnover this year than prior years, and of those, 59% expected that turnover rate would not change over the next 6 months, while 5% thought it would increase.

Analysis to date has almost exclusively focused on the workforce in general. Our own data shows organizations are also at risk of leadership talent attrition and this is particularly pronounced amongst next-generation leaders – those 1-2 levels down from the C-suite.  Fully 73% of next-generation leaders say they are open to new opportunities. To be clear, talent mobility amongst these next-generation leaders was at an already high 65% before the pandemic, so this state of affairs is not a sea-change. There are however two important factors to consider. First, rampant demand. As Anna Penfold, leader of Russell Reynolds’s Global Functions Practice notes: “as we speak to candidates – whether they are actively looking or not – we consistently hear that they are being approached about many other roles, and they frequently have multiple offers on the table.” Second, fewer than 4 in 10 next-generation leaders have confidence in the C-level succession strategy at their organizations. Chances are many of your next-gen leaders are open to new opportunities, don’t see a future within your organization, and are being actively courted by multiple other organizations.

Challenges and Opportunities

The evidence is clear: leaders should be concerned about heightened levels of attrition both in their employee base and in their leadership teams.  While it is right to connect these trends to the effects of the global pandemic, this is not simply a story of burnout, but also one of opportunity.  There are a set of supply and demand-side dynamics that are conspiring to create a buoyant labor market – this creates opportunities for individuals to seek out new career opportunities, and for companies to tap into new talent.

Many individuals, at all levels within organizations, have (or are) re-evaluating their career and life goals and priorities. Others have had a change in circumstance – perhaps they have moved to a new location, or they have had to deal with the challenges of ill-health, death, financial troubles, and caring responsibilities. Furthermore, many employees are simply questioning their employer’s value proposition: did my company show up for me and my colleagues when it mattered? Am I excited by the purpose of my organization? Do I feel valued?

These supply-side dynamics (what talent wants, feels, and needs) are not new but they have been amplified by the psychological stress and dislocation of the pandemic. In turn, they are driving heightened levels of openness to new opportunities (and expectations of what those opportunities must deliver).

While those dynamics play out there are a set of demand-side dynamics that are driving growth in hiring and increased levels of convergent competition – more organizations competing for the same talent.

In addition to voluntary turnover, two key forces create new hiring needs for organizations. Firstly, business transformation and investment.  Forced digital acceleration, redesigning of supply chains, new products and market strategies and opportunities, all driven by the disruption of the pandemic have created new hiring needs.  Secondly, organizations are also resetting leadership expectations. For some, this is a straightforward evaluation of how leaders performed in the crises and the conclusion that some did not pass muster. For other organizations the transformation of their businesses, and critically the expectations of their employees, mean they need to bring on leaders with new skill sets and experiences as well as the capability to lead in a fast-changing world of work. Overlay these dynamics with a broad shift to hybrid working which means employers can cast the boundaries of location aside and tap into new talent pools, and you have a rich cocktail driving growth in hiring and talent competition.

The supply:demand equation – part risk, part opportunity – is accentuated by two foundational trends. Sustainability/ESG. Organizations were already under considerable pressure to make progress on both fronts before the pandemic hit. In order to make progress organizations need to evolve their talent management practices, especially as it relates to leadership talent and culture. New skills will be required to deliver upon sustainability goals, and progress at the top needs to accelerate.  Leaders should be mindful not to underestimate the importance of these trends to attraction and retention – how an organization is engaging with them can make or break their employment value proposition in a competitive marketplace.

Leadership and Talent Management Implications

Organizations are exposed to a substantial amount of talent risk today. But that very same risk also presents an opportunity as talent becomes easier to dislodge from other organizations.

In order to retain talent and have an opportunity to access new talent, leadership teams must consider two critical questions: how they as leaders, lead; and how they need to evolve their talent management strategy.

There are several key leadership attributes that have elevated in importance, and we believe they are here to stay:

Authentic and Empathetic: A heightened ability to sense context and deliver pitch-perfect communications with different audiences in different situations.

Purpose Driven: An ability to connect the organization to societal purpose and explain the “reason for being.”

Inclusive: Going beyond making employees feel heard and including them in building new ways forward.

Innovative and Adaptable: COVID is both accelerating change and (rightly) causing employees to question business and operating models. Leaders must demonstrate that they can evolve their businesses (and themselves) to earn and keep employees engaged.

Do you display these attributes? How does your broader leadership team stack up?

There are several key actions every leader should be focused on taking today that will affect the experience and engagement of their teams:

Walk the (virtual) floors
Connect frequently with teams and individuals beyond set-piece townhalls. Focus on understanding how people’s experience of work has changed, and how work itself is changing

Role model
Walk the talk – if you are encouraging certain behaviors e.g., work-life balance, increased collaboration – you need to role model those behaviors in what you do and how you work with others.

Collaborate down (not just across)
Work with team members deeper in the organization – this not only helps build their engagement and commitment but also throws up information and ideas that top leaders are often insulated from.

The leadership team, directed by the head of talent management or the chief people officer, also needs to ensure that they put in place a set of immediate talent management actions, and engage deeply on a set of strategic talent management questions. Crucially, business leaders need to fully commit to the actions and discussions.

Immediate talent management actions:

(Re)Evaluate your employment proposition and culture: Take a hard look at your EVP and distinguish between the brand proposition and the reality. What do you deliver on? What are you falling short on? What is fixable and what is not?

Implement actions plans for individuals and groups: Invest (and keep investing) in critical individuals and groups but avoid the compensation trap – more pay without a change in how work creates value for the employee is a short-term fix (and easy to compete with).

Strategic talent management questions:

(Re)Evaluate your talent needs: Have you evolved the understanding of what talent needs you have (and is leadership bought into that)? For many businesses, technical and leadership skill needs have evolved at a rapid pace due to the pandemic.

(Re)Evaluate your talent market: How do new ways of working change the talent pools you can tap into (e.g., by location)? Go on the offensive and build a pipeline in advance of need.

(Re)Evaluate your talent model: Are there opportunities to leverage different employment models in order to tap into scarce skills or retain critical talent e.g., redesigning roles, more flexibility on location, using gig talent, building talent partnerships with organizations in your immediate ecosystem?

Author

Thomas Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ global Knowledge organization. He is based in London.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices