Want to Give Your Competitors a Boost? Ignore Your Internal Talent | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Want to Give Your Competitors a Boost? Ignore Your Internal Talent

CEO Succession

Article

Dean Stamoulis

April 29, 2022

5 min

CEO Succession

Executive Summary

Giving competitors a leg-up is the last thing a board wants to do. But, in the pursuit of radical change, some do so inadvertently—by overlooking internal talent when searching for future leaders.

Close

Dean Stamoulis

Atlanta

The last thing a board wants to do is give their competitors any sort of advantage. But many are inadvertently doing so—by overlooking internal talent when searching for future leaders.

When you hire leaders from outside your company, you send a message to your hungry, ambitious employees: your options for advancement here are limited. And the bottom-line impact stretches far beyond the blow of losing star employees.

Employee turnover due to lack of future career opportunities comes at a cost—both in terms of monetary impact and lost experience and skill. Those costs grow exponentially when the employees in question are also prominent leaders and figures within the organization; your rising stars, management team, and C-suite.

Why boards may overlook internals when looking for a CEO successor

There are a number of reasons why boards may overlook internals in their search for a new CEO. For example, the prevailing belief that change and transformation efforts are best led by external talent.

External candidates are often seen as more effective, due to their raft of diversified knowledge and experience and their lack of existing emotional ties. The latter, especially, could allow them to make more difficult strategic and talent decisions, as they would have no relationships or investments to color their thinking.

External candidates may also be seen as safer bets to hitch a company’s wagon to, as they come with clear records of their past achievements—“They did great things for that company, no doubt they’d do great things for us too!” (Despite the fact that, of course, no two companies are alike, and “past performance is not indicative of future results.”)

But every list of potential pros inevitably comes with a number of corresponding cons.

The dangers of overlooking internals: anger, attrition, and unwanted attention

Defaulting to external hires for high-level positions sends a strong message, whether that’s the board’s intention or not. It says the board isn’t confident enough in internal candidates—or that they think a drastic change in direction is needed.

Prioritizing external talent can result in:

Internal talent feeling snubbed and overlooked, leading to them leaving and joining competitors

Low employee morale and the assumption that meaningful career progression isn’t possible from within the company

Lack of shareholder confidence, as the need for outside help could be seen as a sign of uncertainty or internal problems—akin to saying “we were on the wrong track”.

Of course, there’s nothing wrong with change. Historical trends show that the companies consistently thriving through decades of disruptive technology and shifting goalposts are the ones able (and willing) to pivot and adapt to new business paradigms.

But a need for change does not necessitate bringing in external leaders. In fact, companies often do best with internal changemakers: the ‘outside-thinking insiders’.

The case for the internal changemaker

Change can be hard to enact from within an organization; that much is true. Especially when things have ‘always been done a certain way’.

But there will always be visionaries within an organization: people who are excited for—and motivated by—change for the better. They are the ones who have a vision of how things could be improved, alongside the willpower and drive to make it happen; the ones who keep an ear to the wind and stay ahead of changing best practices and ideological change.

These are your internal changemakers. Your outside-thinking insiders.

They may already be in positions of power, or they might be rising stars within your ranks. Given the chance, they can enact organizational change; and, with their existing relationships and established reputations, they often do a better job of getting stakeholders on-side than an external hire could.

Outside-thinking insiders are also more likely to be rapidly effective, as they won’t need to get up to speed with the nuances of company culture, the business model, and where change can begin. Outside-thinking members of the C-suite will also have a better understanding of where the organization can afford to experiment with change—they know where revenue is generated in the organization, meaning they know what to protect throughout the process in order to finance true, long-term transformation.

Championing internal superstars

So how do you find and champion these superstars?

It begins with having internal development processes in place to seek out and nurture stand-out talent. Implementing a CEO succession plan helps with this. Having clear succession planning processes sends the message that the company is invested in its people and their careers—and that it’s heading in a clear direction.

It also helps to set the company up for success and protect it against unexpected upheavals. With succession planning, your company will have options at the ready, even if there is a sudden need for a change in leadership.

To effectively create a CEO succession plan that will support your organization in coming years, you will need to:

Create a Leader Profile that outlines what good looks like for a CEO in your company—what personality traits, skills, background, priorities, etc.

Determine which internal candidates are a good match for the company’s current and projected future needs

Set those candidates on a development path that gives them the experience and know-how they need to succeed

Constantly re-evaluate the company’s path to ensure that training and development matches the company’s evolving needs

Have a plan in place for unsuccessful candidates that will help to prevent them from leaving the company when not selected

External candidates definitely have their place in a company succession planning process—but ideally as last resorts or in drastic times. For forward-thinking companies, succession plans should rest primarily on internal candidates.

Want to find out how to develop a pipeline of outside-thinking internal leadership prospects that will sustain your company for years to come?

Talk to us

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices