They Don’t Make CEOs Like They Used To – Here’s Why That’s a Good Thing | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

They Don’t Make CEOs Like They Used To – Here’s Why That’s a Good Thing

CEO Succession

Article

April 29, 2022

6 min

CEO Succession

Executive Summary

How we learn to and choose to lead has always depended on our heroes and anti-heroes: the role models that show us how to lead—or how not to.

Close

These are the people we encounter throughout our careers, personally or via the media, whose leadership styles leave a serious impact on the way we want to lead—whether that’s positive ("Now, that’s the type of leader I want to be") or negative ("I'm never leading like that").

Over most of the last half-century, the champion CEOs were commonly valorized for their wealth, status, and achievement—their accumulation and status. Things are changing. While success against that profit motive is still celebrated, the reigning CEO ideal has now significantly broadened.

The world demands more from leaders, and today’s CEO champions are the ones growing their businesses while also making the biggest social impact, and demonstrating altruism in service of the company and its people. (And quite frankly, these make for far more interesting role models.)

Why are the criteria for CEO role models changing?

Successful leadership models don’t materialize from the ether—they’re a response to external conditions. Different types of leaders are needed at different times, for different situations.
The leadership styles you’ll need when conditions are calm and clear differ from the styles you’ll need when the company is going through a PR disaster (or hemorrhaging profits, or facing redundancy due to disruptive technology, or battening down the hatches through a global pandemic, or…).

But competitive conditions aren’t the only change drivers. Companies and their existing leaders are recognizing that the factors that made them successful won’t keep them successful; external and internal environments are shaping the conditions for success faster than ever before. Emerging leadership styles also mirror the current zeitgeist—we are attracted to those who appeal to our values, priorities, empathies and hopes for the future.

So even as preferred leadership styles change, it’s important to remember that it’s not always a simple progression from “worse” to “better”.

The old guard – and why it's changing…

Command-and-control leadership has been the most heralded (though also most frequently judged) leadership style over the past 50 years. Now, in the new light of more compassionate thinking, that dominating style has soured in the eyes of many, and is often, rightly or wrongly, villainized for being dated and unempathetic.

But, in many ways, command-and-control leadership was a reflection of the needs and constraints of its time. Companies were restricted by limited communication and connectivity, so having a strong, central vision became a driver for success. Rigid top-down hierarchies brought shape and clarity to large organizations. In short, that CEO champion emerged as a function of circumstances.

Today, lots of things have changed. Workforces are more distributed, but also more connected. Our relationship to work has broadened from purely transactional to something that incorporates social responsibility, wellness, and sustainability. And massive technology acceleration means skill sets have diversified and access to technology has been democratized.

It's not necessarily that command and control isn't compatible with these new conditions—but it certainly doesn't always necessarily capitalize on them.

Finding the sweet spot

Now, we’ve gone from emphasizing single, consolidated power to more egalitarian empowerment and enablement. The old way meant that the conditions of success in the organization were almost wholly dependent on the CEO. For today’s leaders, it’s about installing the conditions for your people to succeed—not being the harbinger of success.

This thinking isn’t new or revolutionary. Indeed, like most modern lessons, we just need to look a little further into the past for insight or solutions. Lao Tzu, the Chinese philosopher known for his maxims on successful leadership, said: “A leader is best when people barely know they exist, when their work is done, their aim fulfilled, those they lead will say: we did it ourselves.”

Today, if a CEO is still trying to do their people’s work for them, it’s likely a road to burnout. It’s a "heroism" that can manifest as self-harm. It’s clear that the “immortal” attitude among CEOs is entirely unsustainable.

Instead, the CEO role model today is now a vulnerable, realistic human being. Leaders are now stewards of collective success rather than owners of a single vision. But organization-wide empowerment is itself a skill that requires balance.

We know sole ownership, command-and-control leadership isn’t wholly suited for today’s circumstances. But reckless empowerment without a single guiding force is equally ineffective.

The challenge for leaders today now lies in finding the sweet spot: a happy medium where CEOs install, guide and maintain systems that empower their employees at every level, while acting as a central driver for the organization’s efforts, exerting control where it’s useful.

Where “The Leaders of the Future” fit in

If the traits you’re looking for in your next CEO reflect where your company is at today, you're going to face big problems down the line. To be truly successful, your CEO succession planning process needs to be forward-looking and explorative in schools of thought, not an embodiment of present (or past) ideals.

The CEO champions we choose are a reflection of what we—as people, companies, as a society—care for. So it's crucial to decide what leadership traits are important enough for us to demand in our next leaders. And even more so, it’s critical to think about what kind of leader will best fit within the future of your unique organization.

It's not about predicting the future; no one has a crystal ball, and goalposts can shift in an instant. What it is about is making an inference on where the future could—or should—lead, and developing a pipeline of talent to fit every possible contingency.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we help companies identify, champion and develop these potential leadership candidates in an ongoing process. This means our clients have a steady flow of solid leadership prospects, no matter what happens.

How do we do it? The building blocks are already there.

At Russell Reynolds, our speciality lies in identifying key leadership traits and the desire to lead in candidates, then setting them on a developmental path that will prepare them to take up the mantle of leadership either after the current CEO, or after the next, or the next.

To do this, we take the pulse of society and its workforce, identify what the current generation of employees considers important and what they expect, forecast the likelihood of a fundamental shift in coming years (based on data and historical trends)—and highlight and develop those qualities in tomorrow’s leaders.

Want to know more about picking future CEOs and developing internal talent that will reflect your company’s evolving needs?

Talk to us

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices