Today’s Brand Guardians Must Be Sustainable Leaders | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Today’s Brand Guardians Must Be Sustainable Leaders

Sustainable LeadershipConsumerCustomer Activation and GrowthSustainability Officers

Article

October 11, 2021

7 min

Sustainable LeadershipConsumerCustomer Activation and GrowthSustainability Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Winning over today’s consumer is harder than ever as consumers are buying with greater intention.

Close

Written by Amy Scissons, Chief Marketing & Communications Officer, RRA | Originally published on Thrive Global

Increasingly, people want to support organizations with a clearly defined purpose that transcends the commercial bottom line.  Corporations are responding.

A host of organizations are expanding their focus on corporate sustainability, weaving together environmental, economic and social values for long-term growth and success. Commitment to sustainability is at an all-time high—92% of CEOs believe the integration of sustainability will be essential to the future success of their business.

But a new report released by our team at Russell Reynolds Associates (RRA), Divides and Dividends: Leadership Actions for a More Sustainable Future, found that just 43% of C-suite executives say their organization has a sustainability strategy that has been acted on and clearly communicated.

So, what does this mean for marketing?

It means it’s time to step up.

It’s time to help our CEOs develop credible and compelling sustainability strategies.

It’s time to bring colleagues along on the sustainability journey.

It’s time to tell your organization’s sustainability story to the marketplace.

The how is important here. Marketers have a responsibility to avoid ‘greenwashing’ and ensure that marketing messages, while aspirational, are rooted in the reality of the organization.

A recent survey of 650 institutional investors with more than $25.9trn in assets under management globally showed greenwashing is one of the biggest challenges investors face when choosing investments.

The best way to avoid this risk is to create a bench of leaders who are committed to profit and purpose—both across the C-suite and throughout the marketing department. We call these people sustainable leaders.

RRA recently worked with the United Nations Global Compact to identify a blueprint for sustainable leadership. The following are four key attributes that marketing leaders will need to help their organizations develop an authentic voice on corporate sustainability and create long-term value.

Multilevel systems thinking: balancing macro, micro, and “me” priorities

Sustainable leaders show high levels of curiosity, ambition and results orientation. They inspire executives to explore the world and help cut through its systemic complexities.

This means not only helping fix the big issues affecting the future of society, such as climate change, pollution and global pandemics, but also work-level challenges that are important to employees too. It means keeping focused on—and connecting the dots between—macro and micro concerns to benefit both business and individual interests.

Sustainable leaders’ willingness to understand both what’s happening outside and inside their organization is key. No single business can tackle the world's complex systemic challenges. To create systems-level solutions, leaders must ally with other businesses, civil society organizations, academia and governments.

A recent example of multi-level system thinking is found in the partnership campaign between Bloomberg and the Tokyo Metropolitan Government, which offered an in-depth look at Tokyo’s efforts to protect itself from natural disasters as well as the city’s adoption of new technologies like autonomous vehicles and 5G.

By taking a multilevel system approach, sustainable marketing leaders naturally avoid the pitfalls of self-serving ‘greenwashing’ in favor of campaign messaging that promotes synergies within the larger ecosystem. They incorporate the interplay of the larger economic, societal, and environmental systems around them to pinpoint value and drive meaningful change. In the long term, it allows leaders to effectively manage emerging risks in the marketplace and spot long-term growth opportunities.

Stakeholder inclusion

Sustainable marketing leaders widely bring other stakeholders into the folds of their campaigns. Whether engaging employees, investors, customers, governments, or communities, sustainable marketing leaders seek out various points of view to drive decision-making, create more value and strengthen the voice of brand messaging.

Soft skills are more in demand than ever before. Leaders need the mental dexterity, empathy and courage maintain confidence in an exceedingly complex operating environment—and trigger action toward sustainability. Part of why these skills are in such high demand is because they help unlock a multilevel systems approach and, subsequently, build stakeholder inclusion.

In our Divides and Dividends study, we asked employees to indicate whether they believe the senior leaders at their organization display each of 10 important attributes: humility self-awareness, authenticity, empathy, leading by example, inclusiveness, purpose, hopefulness, humanity, and transparency. Only around a third of respondents said the senior most leaders at their organization exhibit transparency, humanity, and hopefulness. Even fewer said they lead by example (31%) or that they display authenticity (29%), self-awareness (24%), or humility (23%).

To drive inclusivity in campaigns, marketing leaders must demonstrate high capability in these areas. These attributes help them to address a common problem that hampers most marketing teams: limited cognitive diversity. When seeking out and responding to the perspective of a wide range of stakeholders, leaders become powerful problem-solvers. Naturally, their campaigns are better positioned to respond to current challenges and create more value in the marketplace.

When IKEA launched its ‘Make Home Count’ campaign during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, it homed in on stakeholder engagement to cultivate a strong emotional brand connection with current events. Proving that you don’t always need a mammoth budget to make a splash, the spot was created entirely from footage shot by employees who were locked down at home—just like millions of people around the globe.

Disruptive innovation

Real progress in corporate sustainability will not happen incrementally or in a protected “business-as-usual” bubble. Instead, transformation requires exponential change and business model innovation. In our Divides and Dividends research, the greatest barriers to embedding sustainability across business strategy are slow-changing company culture and organizational complexity, followed by a lack of drive from senior leadership and a lack of organizational investment. For example, when it comes to taking action toward sustainability, 25% of C-suite leaders hold the belief that their customers “won’t want this.”

However, on the flip side, sustainable leaders have the courage to overhaul traditional approaches and are willing to disrupt their organizations and their industries. They are constantly asking the questions: How can we do this differently? How can we do this better?

These leaders answer these questions with science and empirical data, pushing their businesses beyond today’s best practices toward tomorrow’s required practices. While this almost always veers into unknown territory, they know that fields of uncertainty are where the best innovation happens.

A recent marketing example that comes to mind is Volkswagen’s ‘The Last Mile’ campaign, which unexpectedly bid farewell to the brand’s iconic Beetle and sealed its commitment to electric vehicles (EVs). Admitting that the brand needed to scrap its legacy model was a risky move—especially when profits and demand for EVs are still in question—Volkswagen will likely gain respect for evolving with the times for the greater environmental good. The courage may already be paying off, with Volkswagen making motions to overtake Tesla as the global EV leader by the middle of the decade. Notably, its chosen strategy is to seek out strategic partnerships that will make their batteries more affordable, which also reflects stakeholder engagement and a multilevel systems approach.

When designing campaigns, sustainable marketing leaders make bold investments that test the limits of what is possible and often defy bureaucracy. As marketing pioneers, they continuously innovate to arrive at a place where the trade-off between profitability and sustainability no longer exists.

Long-term activation

By its very nature, corporate sustainability favors long-term solutions over 'band-aid' fixes. Leaders who don't prioritize ‘long-termism’ may miss out on opportunities to expand to new markets, drive innovation, identify problems and manage external risks sprouting in the world around them. In the end, this will reduce their propensity to create value and, eventually, will render their organizations obsolete.

Campaigns that have failed due to ‘short-termism’ include Pepsi’s commercial with Kendall Jenner, which was said to trivialize the Black Lives Matter movement, and Mastercard’s tone-deaf ‘goals for meals’ campaign during the World Cup in 2018, which ‘gamified’ world hunger.

Sustainable leaders in marketing are prepared for turbulent headwinds, as their decisions may not always immediately resonate with short-term-oriented stakeholders. Yet, they also know that long-term activation doesn’t necessarily sacrifice short-term priorities. In another research report from our team at RRA, we found that leaders who are focused primarily on the long term (about 20% of leaders) are not only more informed on long-term issues, they also demonstrate greater expertise than ‘short-termer’ counterparts on more immediate issues like operational risks, current products, and sales activities.

Looking forward: a lynchpin for value creation

While leading organizations are taking concerted steps to embed sustainability into frameworks and processes, some struggle to communicate these efforts with authentic brand messaging. Some are making blunders in balancing sustainability goals with financial prosperity, failing to move the two priorities forward in tandem. Others are distracted by short-term stunts that dilute brand image. Such missteps devalue an organization’s commitment to sustainability and stand in the way of collaboration, stakeholder engagement, innovation and long-term goal setting.

Seeing sustainability as a critical lever for value creation, rather than simply a brand-building tool, will help companies fulfill their responsibility to sustainability and seize emerging opportunities. In today's marketplace, surface-level actions will not deliver real gains in sustainability. If organizations are to make tangible progress towards sustainability, leaders must commit to making profound changes to strategy and operations.

Yet when asked about the driving force behind their company’s approach to sustainability, 45% of C-suite executives say they are motivated by brand management concerns—they want to be viewed as socially responsible and reputable or apply sustainability as a competitive advantage. In comparison, just 21% say that value creation sets the agenda. Marketing leaders must help C-suite leaders drive the latter figure up so that brands unlock tangible value for shareholders, employees, consumers, and communities.

When marketing leaders embrace a new model and mindset, they can help organizations strengthen their voice and harness corporate sustainability as a lynchpin for competitive, differentiated, and equitable value creation.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices