The Real State of Sustainability  | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Real State of Sustainability

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

September 28, 2021

4 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

The perils of climate change, social inequities and a still-raging pandemic have put unprecedented pressures on businesses.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

Sarah Galloway

London

How many leaders are rising to the challenge and taking concerted action to deliver lasting change for people, planet and profit? The short answer is not enough.

This is the headline finding of Russell Reynolds Associates’ latest global research on sustainable business. We surveyed 9,501 C-suite executives, next-generation leaders and employees across 11 countries to understand the real state of sustainability today. The resulting global study, Divides and Dividends: Leadership Actions for a More Sustainable Future, exposes the divisions and barriers hindering progress—and the sustainability actions leaders must take to yield both financial and non-financial dividends.

Organized into five key themes, the study’s findings and implications enable leaders to face and bridge the divides challenging businesses and society today:

Macro, micro and “me” priorities

Leaders must keep focused on both macro and micro issues to mutually benefit individual and business interests. While C-suite executives and employees agree on the big issues that most affect the future of society—climate change, pollution and global pandemics—employees also want to see action on the work-level challenges that affect them. When asked about the specific issues they wanted senior leaders to solve, employees cited health and wellbeing, work-life flexibility, equal pay for equal work, and equal opportunities to advancement.

The best sustainable leaders are able to devise and embed sustainable strategies that produce tangible outcomes relevant to all people, planet and profit. By effectively managing and addressing macro-level issues along with employees’ more present and immediate concerns about economic and job security, flexibility and greater equity, leaders have a significant opportunity to increase trust, engagement, loyalty and productivity.

Brand-centered motivation versus value creation

When asked whether the driving force behind their company’s sustainability strategy focused on brand management, risk avoidance, impact reduction or value creation, almost half of C-suite executives (45%) say their company’s approach to sustainability is driven by brand management. Only one in five (21%) believe that value creation sets the agenda.

Unless organizations engage with sustainability through the lens of value creation, they will not be able to put in place the long-lasting changes that will accrue present and future value for people, planet and profit. They also run the risk of green-washing accusations. In our study, organizations that see value creation as their North Star expect to make greater progress towards sustainable business in the next five years.

The say/do divide

Despite how important C-suite leaders say climate change and pollution are, when it comes to environmental sustainability, what CEOs say they do is markedly different than what employees see them do. While 79% of C-suite executives say the environmental practices of their company are as good as the best practices in the industry, only half of employees agree (54%). Furthermore, 73% of C-suite leaders say that their organizations place the same importance on sustainability as they do on profits, but fewer than half of employees (48%) say the same. Senior leaders need to address two inter-dependent factors at play: effectively assess the level of importance they are placing on sustainability—and whether those efforts are enough—and how well these efforts are both communicated to and understood by employees.

Next-generation leaders at the vanguard

Next-generation leaders are the most engaged drivers of sustainability action. Propelled by prior experience (40% have had three or more sustainability responsibilities) and enabled by their front-line responsibilities for executing sustainability strategies and programs, next-generation leaders are advancing and accelerating sustainability strategy and results.

Leadership + culture = impact

The greatest barriers to embedding sustainability into business strategy is slow-changing company culture and organizational complexity, followed by a lack of drive from senior leadership and lack of organizational investment. There is no doubt that leaders need soft skills to galvanize action. Yet when it comes to leadership attributes, only around a third of employees say the senior-most leaders at their organization exhibit transparency, humanity and hopefulness. Even fewer say they display humility (23%) and self-awareness (24%), or that they are authentic (29%) and lead by example (29%). Leaders must urgently step up to this challenge, or risk a lack of trust in their leadership capabilities, as well as a loss of engagement and loyalty

Ultimately, contending with people, planet and profit priorities must not be reduced to either/or decisions. Today’s leaders on the forefront of strategically embedding sustainability embrace the value of integrating all three. They fundamentally understand that their businesses cannot thrive in a world of inequity, unrest or environmental stress and that bridging the gaps is vitally important to the health of their companies.

Ana Botin, Executive Chair, Santander, states that “we’ve worked together to deliver profit with purpose—ensuring that our day-to-day operations help more people and businesses prosper in a sustainable way.”1

Unilever CEO Alan Jope says: “I don’t think sustainability forces a choice between long- and short-term when it is embedded in the strategy.”2

Michael Corbat, the CEO of Citi, says: “We remain laser focused on contributing to a strong global economy. Our clients, colleagues and stakeholders expect no less.”3

To achieve a more sustainable tomorrow, leaders must take their next steps today. With its key insights and actions to guide you, Divides and Dividends gives you the roadmap.

1. The Rise of the Sustainable Banker, Russell Reynolds Associates, 2020
2. Leadership for the Decade of Action, Russell Reynolds Associates and the United Nations Global Compact, 2020
3. The Sustainable Banker, Russell Reynolds Associates, 2020

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices