What Leaders can Learn from Service | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What Leaders can Learn from Service

LeadershipExecutive Search

Article

Ben Shrewsbury

January 06, 2022

4 min

LeadershipExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Leadership lessons come from many places – education and related work experience, for example.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Both of those factors have a place in leadership development, but one often overlooked way to build leadership muscle memory is through service.

The concept of service was ingrained in me from an early age – I watched my parents and grandparents give of themselves in support of others across their personal and professional lives. The notion of service became even more relevant in my college years and beyond when I embraced a profession that held as one of its core values, “Service Before Self.”

When colleagues and clients find out about my time in the US Air Force, many are interested to hear about those experiences, especially given the military’s reputation for building capable, people-focused leaders. While I certainly learned a lot during my time in the military, the lessons that came out of putting purpose before self in that phase of my career helped lay a foundation that has carried over into my observations and actions outside the military.

Going a step further, I’d argue that any leader should incorporate service roles to help build leadership effectiveness. And it doesn’t need to come from time in uniform. The opportunity to serve each other exists in multiple ways. It’s more a mindset than a specific affiliation. As we know, there is a whole philosophy around servant leadership that demonstrates the advantages of a leader that positions themselves in service of their teams and the organization.

Without getting into the specifics around what servant leadership is or arguing the merits of the practice, some of my own experiences underscore how service – in any capacity – can help foster a leadership style that will well support the leader and the organization. This is especially true as leaders employ empathy and inclusion in driving positive culture within their teams and organizations.

This idea is reinforced by Russell Reynold’s most recent, multi-year analysis of what most impacts a culture of belonging – the ultimate test of an organization’s inclusion efforts. You can read the report titled Walk the Talk: Inclusive Leadership Development Moves the Needle on inclusive leadership [here]. If there is one key finding I would highlight, it is this: Inclusive leadership characteristics such as empathy and the willingness to accept feedback have measurable impacts on inclusion and give belonging a lift more than any other factors measured.

That finding further supports how leaders can use a service mindset to build soft skills that deliver hard results – a great starting place in understanding how serving your team builds an inclusive culture.

First, when leaders treat their role as a service to their team, it puts a priority on the team. This organically cultivates a more supportive environment where members are compelled to build each other up in the name of common goals. It’s a dynamic that empowers employees to contribute by making the work more personal and helping everyone see how their individual contributions impact shared accomplishments.

Second, serving a team requires leaders to solicit feedback. This is a key element of driving an inclusive culture and a point that was confirmed in our study. Asking people about their challenges or calling on them to share their ideas helps employees feel heard and valued, which fosters engagement.

A third benefit is leadership accountability. Leaders who operate from a foundation of service take personal responsibility for outcomes versus putting that expectation on the team. Many leaders who shoulder accountability tend to be good motivators of their teams. In turn, their teams are more likely to be reliable stewards of the business as they become enthusiastic supporters of broad goals versus a singular focus on impressing “the boss.”

Finally, leading from a service-orientation helps elevate a sense of purpose. Again, this stems from being a part of something bigger than the individual. The idea of not only having a “good job” but doing good in the process of your job is a driving factor in where people choose to work. Research has found that when leaders connect people to the purpose, those employees are more engaged, more loyal and more productive. This has a lot to do with how employees perceive leadership. When they see leaders are more concerned about the team, they truly become engaged in the task at hand.

Inclusive leadership will continue to be a key organizational imperative, especially as the war for talent escalates. Leaders know that it is about far more than hiring the right people. You must keep and develop the talent you have. And, doing that requires a workplace experience where staying warrants the commitment from the team. Companies that want to influence inclusion and drive a culture of belonging should consider teaching leaders how the values of service can help get them there faster and in a more meaningful and authentic way.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices