What you permit you promote | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What you permit you promote

Career Advice

Article

July 29, 2021

5 min

Career Advice

Executive Summary

Good people trying to do good things often appear to outsiders to be part of a ruthless and amoral world where anything will be done in the name of profit.

Close

Like most business professionals I spend my time working with decent people who are well intentioned, honourable and care about the world.

Unfortunately, these good people, trying to do good things often appear to outsiders to be part of a ruthless and amoral world where anything will be done in the name of profit. How can we resolve this apparent contradiction? The paradox of values-led people appearing to lack them comes to the fore during the depressingly regular stream of corporate scandals that fill our papers. Whether it be emissions scandals in the motor industry, worker treatment in clothing or money laundering in financial services I am sure that within all of those organisations the vast majority of people were as shocked by events as outsiders were.

It’s easy to oversimplify these scandals. Either by portraying them as deliberate strategies employed by unethical leadership or by scapegoating “rogue” middle managers. The truth is more complex. In a former role, I was once lucky enough to spend time listening in at a customer service call desk and heard first-hand what may be one of the explanations. A customer was calling to complain about being overcharged. The issue was soon resolved, as it appeared that their discount as a key worker had expired given that they had to prove their status once a year. When the call was over, I asked the customer service operator why they didn’t just remind clients to reconfirm status once a year and she replied, “I guess our senior managers hope they don’t notice”. I asked if she had ever told them this was happening, to which she said that she assumed they must know, so it wasn’t worth the bother. As an outside consultant, I was able to take a risk and asked the question. It became clear that this wasn’t deliberate, and a better policy was soon put in place.

But how did this happen in the first place? Well, I’m sure that somewhere along the line there was an incentive to let customers pay too much. Middle managers were measured on revenue, so proactively instigating something which would cost money was always unlikely. Junior people assumed that those above either actively wanted to take advantage of customers or didn’t want to know what is really going on so that they can have plausible deniability. For some leaders that may have been true, but not all, and hopefully not even the majority. Most want to lead an open, honest and ethical business. A profitable one of course, but still an ethical one. Why was it so hard to do so?

In 2020, research conducted by The Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence, in collaboration with the Faas Foundation, found that of 14,500 U.S. employees surveyed, nearly 1 in 4 people (23%) felt pressured to do things at work that they knew was wrong. With 80% agreeing that they felt they weren’t able to voice their views against such behaviour. The problem is clearly a large one and while we are less tolerant of bad corporate behaviour than ever before, it doesn’t seem to be going away quickly enough.

As with many changes in organizations the behaviour of leaders is key and two things in particular are pivotal: what they know about and what they do about what they know. First, let’s consider what they know. If their knowledge of what is really happening on the front line only comes through the chain of command or corporate reports, it always runs the risk of being filtered, either intentionally or not. Leaders must find some way of seeing for themselves what actually happens. They could do as I did and listen in on calls, or more simply just spending time in conversation with staff and customers, the more informal the better.

Secondly, how do they act? I learned once the importance of not walking past something which is wrong. I used to coach a COO who lived by the mantra, “What you permit, you promote”. He explained that he learned if he walked past a blocked door, he was promoting poor fire safety, if he walked past a dirty product display, he was promoting poor hygiene and if he walked past a mis-priced product he was promoting cheating customers, so he never just walked past. In our busy lives this can be hard, because first and foremost it requires you to stop, maybe change direction and take a new path to explore why the thing you have noticed is wrong and then see remediation through to completion. You won’t solve every issue, but others will note your response to the ones you see and hopefully realise that this is the correct response.

So, the cartoon corporate villains we read about in the media are not what they seem. Poor behaviour is rarely the result of a single person’s agenda but rather an unintended failure in communication and collaboration between everyone involved. Recognising this is important. Unless we understand how and why poor business practices evolve, we can’t prevent them from happening in the future. But this does not mean that leaders can shirk accountability. On the contrary, it shows just how important those hard to measure leadership skills are. The ability to articulate a social purpose beyond profit, to shape culture, to listen and most importantly to not walk past the small infractions. These are the skills which can help prevent the next corporate scandal.

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsLeadership StrategiesCulture RiskDevelopment and Transition

What Aspiring C-suite Leaders Need to Know About “Being Available”

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsSuccessionFinancial ServicesFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

Beyond the Balance Sheet: Unleashing the Full Potential of Financial Services CFOs

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices