When 9 is the Perfect Number | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

When 9 is the Perfect Number: the 7+2 Model for Highly Effective Boards

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

+ 3 authors

April 29, 2022

8 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

The 2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study explore multiple aspects of director and leadership behaviors and board agendas.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Rich Fields

Boston

Laura Sanderson

London

Marc Sanglé-Ferrière

Paris

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Munich

Margot McShane

San Francisco

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

RRA 2022 GLOBAL BOARD CULTURE AND DIRECTORS BEHAVIORS STUDY

Download the PDF version

Every three years, Russell Reynolds Associates surveys a global group of board directors, asking them about their board, their fellow directors, how they spend their time, and what topics they focus on the most. This year, over 1,100 directors participated. Russell Reynolds uses the information they provide us in our work assessing directors, recruiting and evaluating board leaders, and as part of our board effectiveness and advisory work.

The 2022 survey data was particularly rich, and Russell Reynolds Associates will be publishing a series of reports throughout this year looking at high performing director and board leader behaviors, the attributes of high performing boards, sustainability, and other topics. This series will help directors around the world understand the latest trends and insights in each of these areas, and learn what they can do to enhance their own board performance and effectiveness.

No corporate director dreams of sitting on an ineffective board – yet many will find themselves serving on a board that underperforms relative to their expectations.

As part of our 2022 Global Director Behaviors and Board Culture study, over 1,100 directors shared insights about the people they serve with, how they focus their time and attention, and how well their board operates (including both its effectiveness and its overall culture). Not surprisingly, we are particularly interested in directors who rated their board as highly effective; a 9 or 10 on a 1-10 scale.

What is different about those boards that lead to such high performance? We developed a key driver model that assessed which behaviors among a 28-item inventory (related to communication, engagement, relationship building, perspective, and character, as well as specific leadership behaviors demonstrated by their chair) significantly impact board effectiveness. What we discovered was a framework we call the 7+2 Model for Highly Effective Boards:

To develop the most effective board possible, board leaders should look to assemble a group of directors who, as a collective group, always demonstrate seven behaviors:

A board leader who focuses the board’s attention on relevant matters

A board leader who actively seeks different points of view

Directors who foster an inclusive culture

Directors who ask the right questions

Directors who use both a three to five year and over five year time horizon to evaluate opportunities and make decisions

Directors who are willing to constructively challenge management, when appropriate

Directors who actively cultivate a relationship with the CEO

And sometimes – without going to extremes that can be problematic – demonstrate two additional behaviors:

Directors who possess independent perspective and avoid “groupthink”

Directors who actively cultivate relationships with fellow directors

Why did these traits rise to the top, and why do we believe that this combination is the most effective?

The Seven

A high performing board should have a leader (chair, lead independent director, or senior independent director) who always focuses them on the most important, value-adding topics, ensuring that everyone is contributing openly and fully. This is a critical element as boards without such leadership can meander or be distracted on the wrong topics. This board orchestration takes a combination of wisdom, business judgment and a deft style for a board leader to accomplish all these attributes, hence why great board leaders are hard to find – and, with practice, tend to improve over many years.

At the same time, directors need to be consistently open and inclusive of their fellow directors’ diverse views, ask the right questions of those individuals as well as other meeting attendees, and focus on the long-term without taking their eyes off short term performance. They also need a constructive, but not deferential, relationship with the CEO and other senior executives – creating a productive tension that produces value for both the board and management. These are high aspirations, and some directors do not have the leadership or behavioral traits necessary to act in this manner. We often hear of directors who want to be too involved in the management of the business, or who distract board discussions by going off on tangents. Being a high performing board member takes focus, self-awareness, and an openness to feedback.

The Two

Boards want as much of the seven behaviors as they can get, but the additional two behaviors are different:  Boards want them, but in moderation. Too little or too much are both detrimental.

A board needs directors who are independent and who avoid groupthink – but who are not so independent that they are unable to create consensus and agreement. While lacking independent thought is a problem, willful independence that crosses into stubbornness—or even disruption—is also a major issue. Finding the middle ground is key.

Similarly, boards need directors who are able to establish professional relationships with their peers, avoiding becoming overly familiar and potentially creating cliques, or becoming so friendly with fellow directors that they are no longer able to critically evaluate ideas and arguments put forward in discussions.  As with independence, finding the middle ground is key.

This 7+2 model takes work and continuous focus to develop and sustain, which is one reason why there are so few truly high performing boards in the corporate world.

The Link Between Culture and Effectiveness

Truly effective boards are built upon the foundation of a strong boardroom culture. To only aim for effective operations – focused directors, thoughtful agendas – without also aiming to build a productive, collaborative culture, is to invite failure as a board leader.

We conducted a second analysis, this time looking at what behaviors of board members drive strong, positive board culture (again, a 9 or 10 on a 1-10 scale). This time, we found three behaviors that drive effectiveness are also critically important to driving board culture:

A board leader who focuses the board’s attention on relevant matters

Directors who foster an inclusive culture

Directors who use both a three to five year and over five year time horizon to evaluate opportunities and make decisions

To put it another way, when a board leader focuses on improving effectiveness by prioritizing these three actions of the 7+2 Model, they will simultaneously improve the board culture, building the foundation necessary for long-term success.

By focusing on the 7+2 Model, boards should be able to achieve high performance and strengthen the board’s cultural cohesion, as both build on each other simultaneously. We believe this will result in benefits for their directors individually, the overall board and for all the shareholders and stakeholders who benefit from a boardroom operating at peak performance.

From Insight to Action

So how does a board get to high performance? It takes focus and an understanding of where the board collectively—and individual directors, specifically—are in this journey. Boards need to have the courage to ask whether they are honestly adding value and enhancing company performance, or if they are falling short on their potential impact. Many boards do not take the time for genuine self-reflection. Too many board assessments (whether internally or externally supported) tick the box exercises, or surveys that provide no nuance and relatively few insights, rendering them almost worthless. As we noted in our 2020 report, Board and Director Assessments That Matter:

In our experience, even well-run assessment processes (those that include director interviews and some level of benchmarking) often fail to connect board performance issues systematically and across multiple years. In too many countries, the board assessment is viewed simply as an annual event and not part of an integrated and ongoing approach to enhancing board performance. We believe that boards need to shift away from a one-year-at-a-time “event” approach to a more substantive longer-term board assessment and review “system.” Developing a multi-year board assessment “system” can generate greater insights and impact and increase the opportunity for the board to support value creation.

These insights still resonate today. Considering them alongside the 7+2 model, and an enhanced board and director review system, boards have the tools necessary to define what it means to be a high performing board, and to begin the journey towards achieving that status.

Methodology

Over 1,100 supervisory board-level directors from more than 41 countries participated in the Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey, with 55 percent of respondents based in Europe, 27 percent in the Americas, 12 percent in Oceana, 3 percent in Asia, 2 percent in Africa, and 1 percent in the Middle East. Industries represented included financial services (26 percent of respondents), industrial and natural resources (22 percent), consumer (11 percent), technology (11 percent), healthcare (10 percent), and professional and business services (6 percent). Forty-four percent of respondents’ companies had annual revenue over $1 billion.

Download the PDF version

Authors

Rusty O’Kelley co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas.  He is based in Stamford.
Rich Fields leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board Effectiveness practice.  He is based in Boston.
Laura Sanderson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe.  She is based in London.
Marc Sangle-Ferriere co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe. He is based in Paris.
Jens-Thomas Pietralla leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources practice, and co-leads the firm’s Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe. He is based in Munich.
Steve Langton leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Asia Pacific. He is based in Sydney.
Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas. She is based in San Francisco.
PJ Neal is the global head of knowledge and operations for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners. He is based in Boston.
Jemi Crookes is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Washington, DC.

2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study

Explore full paper series

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices