How CEOs Make Complex Decisions—Even When They Don’t Have All The Intel | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How CEOs Make Complex Decisions—Even When They Don’t Have All The Intel

Career AdviceLeadershipAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

June 21, 2022

5 min

Career AdviceLeadershipAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

It’s becoming harder for CEOs to make decisions. Discover the 3 skills leaders need to hone if they are to make the right judgment calls in a volatile world.

Close

Anita Wingrove

Melbourne

Alistair Macrae

Sydney
Melbourne

Aimee Williamson

Sydney

Has decision-making just got harder? With the business world spinning faster than ever before—and with no pre-established playbooks to fall back on—making high-stakes judgments in exhausting situations is now a daily task for every CEO.

The costs of getting it wrong are high. CEOs are under the microscope, with shareholders, customers, communities, and regulators scrutinizing every decision. Even seemingly innocuous choices can lead to a backlash. CEOs must now walk the tightrope of ensuring their decisions keep as many groups happy as possible.

Take the sustainability agenda, for example. Coming up with a plan to curb emissions requires thinking through multiple levels of complexity and engaging with multiple stakeholders to drive momentum.  At the same time, CEOs have to manage resistance. CEOs face the tricky task of navigating a diversity of expectations—and finding a path forward.

Of course, leaders can never make a perfect choice. No answer is ever 100% right or 100% wrong. Yet, there are certain skills that help CEOs make high-stakes decisions that keep their business moving forward and their stakeholders onside—even when they’re up against the clock and don’t have all the information. Our research has revealed key capabilities that effective decision-makers share.

The three skills that effective decision-makers share

Our studies show that good decision-making isn’t just about how smart you are. CEOs who make the best judgment calls typically share three common traits.

Together they help the CEO tap into an ecosystem of information internally and externally that keeps them alert to a fast-changing business context, as well as the short-term and long-term implications of their decisions.

1. The courage to stay open to new ideas and solutions

As the CEO’s job expands in complexity, so does the need to stay open to new answers. In a fast-moving world, the usual fixes no longer apply. Solutions now come in many different shapes and sizes—and sometimes from unusual places.

CEOs who are confident in making complex decisions index highly on curiosity and empathy. This allows them to understand issues from different vantage points and think through all possible outcomes (and trade-offs) before making their decision.

At the same time, they are not afraid to ruffle feathers with unpopular or confrontational decisions. They take an active role in managing stakeholders’ expectations with the help of the board, particularly the chairperson.

2. The humility to admit they don’t have all the answers

It used to be that CEOs could adopt a command-and-control approach to decisions. There was no wrong answer—only their answer. But the maverick lone-ranger CEO archetype is now out of favor. Today’s CEOs need to act as a “Collaborator in Chief”.

CEOs who make high-stake decisions in complex environments are comfortable saying they don’t have all the answers. They know that fielding a wide range of viewpoints from across the organizations leads to a better understanding of blind spots—and better decisions.

That’s why these CEOs build leadership teams that provide complementary capabilities, diversity of experience, perspective, and cognitive abilities. And it’s why they are proactive in partnering with the board on sticky problems—as well as external stakeholders, such as regulators and the communities in which they operate.

Of course, the buck always stops with the CEO; they remain accountable for decisions both good and bad. Yet by fielding advice from a range of sources, they feel less alone when it comes to making the final call.

3. The ability to tune into their emotions—and use them for edge

Complex decisions often carry a heavy emotional weight. Trying to make a decision when you don’t have all the information can leave you feeling vulnerable and exposed. And this pressure and stress can lead to extreme behaviors that undermine your ability to make a confident judgment call.

When emotions take over, you lose the ability to think rationally. Your curiosity disappears and your desire to see issues from different vantage points evaporates. You begin to seek comfort in tried-and-tested answers, instead of staying open to novel solutions or new ways of doing things.

CEOs who make the best complex decisions don’t run away from their emotions. They tune in to them, while not letting them take over. They show high emotional intelligence. Their clear-headedness ensures they avoid knee-jerk reactions and remain flexible to new ideas. When things change—or new information arises—they react with agility, managing the unexpected with maturity and poise.

Where to go from here

Avoid groupthink. Build a leadership team that complements your strengths and offers a diversity of viewpoints. Prioritize team effectiveness to ensure that individuals still gel together as a team.

Collaborate. Create a strong working relationship with your board chair, using them as a partner and ally, and as a sounding board for complex decision-making.

Lean into your emotions. But learn to control them, rather than letting them control you. Self-awareness is key here. Make an honest appraisal of how you react to high-stakes situations. Executive development programs can help you develop your EQ and LQ.

Get to know your limits. Everyone has a “shadow side”—the parts of yourself that you don’t want others to see. But the best decision-makers are those who can admit that they don’t have all the answers.

Research Methodology

This article was based on in-depth interviews with 20 board chairs in Australia, providing a cross-industry perspective. We carried out qualitative analysis of the interviews and the framework development was based on the results, plus additional research on advanced decision-making.

Authors

Anita Wingrove concentrates on CEO succession and development and broader C-suite advisory services across Asia Pacific. She is based in Melbourne.
Alistair Macrae focuses on Chief Financial Officer and General Legal Counsel succession, assessments and search assignments. He is based jointly in Melbourne and Sydney.
Aimee Williamson works with boards, CEOs and their teams to build better leaders who are well equipped to deliver on a strategic agenda. Jointly based in Sydney and Melbourne.
Ruben Hillar is a Knowledge Director at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in Washington, DC.
Eric Wimpfheimer is a Global Knowledge Leader at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in New York.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices