Fueling a New Wave of Responsible PE Investments | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Fueling a New Wave of Responsible PE Investments

LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernancePrivate CapitalSustainability Officers

Article

April 08, 2022

3 min

LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernancePrivate CapitalSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

PE firms operating in China who align their investment strategies to national priorities, and market trends, will reap the biggest returns in the years ahead.

Close

How China’s current regulatory environment is fueling a new wave of responsible PE Investments.

In the past year, China has enacted a series of regulatory changes designed to develop a modern socialist economy. The government is moving rapidly to reach its strategic social and political goals outlined in its 14th Five-Year Plan for 2021-2025, which focus on China’s “vast domestic market and bolster its economic self-reliance as it faces an increasingly challenging external environment.”

In the wake of its publication, countless media outlets spoke of “regulatory assaults” and “crackdowns,” warning that the new rules would disrupt PE investment strategies and the flow of capital across the country. Yet six months on, it is clear that there is no need to panic.

As any PE firm operating in China knows, navigating the ever-changing regulatory environment comes with the territory. The updates will create both winners and losers—but those who continue to align their investment strategies to national priorities, as well as market trends, will be the ones that reap the biggest returns in the years ahead. While we may start to see some rationalization, the market for capital in China still remains hot.

Changing regulations shift PE investment priorities

One of the sectors that has been hit hardest by changing regulations is big tech. Tightening rules over the past year are expected to cost companies such as Alibaba, SoftBank, as well as investors, billions of dollars. In July, the country banned private tutors from providing instruction online, another industry that benefitted from massive capital infusions from PE firms. In August 2021, a rule restricting those 18 and under from playing video games for more than three hours a week is also hitting the gaming industry hard.

“The speed of the reforms means that companies in fields from fintech-lending and e-commerce to self-driving cars, social media and video-gaming must rethink how they make money and handle data,” The Economist recently reported.

As companies in sectors hard hit by regulation continue to pivot, new opportunities are emerging elsewhere for PE investors. From biotech and renewable energy to artificial intelligence (AI) and electric vehicles, PE firms investing in China are eyeing industries that will meet the country’s determination to be less reliant on outside resources and reach its commitment to net-zero emissions by 2060.

Managing regulatory expectations in these industries will continue to be a priority for PE firms operating in China. Expertise is required to stay on top of changing and challenging regulations, especially as firms seek to understand the risks and challenges associated with compliance while maintaining business goals and objectives.

Adding to the new PE Equation:  Meeting ESG Standards

Adoption of ESG principles is already widespread in China. Voluntary disclosure of ESG data by Shanghai-Shenzhen CSI 300 Index companies nearly doubled from 2009 to 2021 to reach 83% Yet it is widely expected that the changing regulatory framework will further accelerate China’s transition to sustainable business practices.

The recent 14th Five Year Plan set out steps to accelerate the shift towards a low-carbon economy and achieve carbon neutrality by 2060, as well as goals to safeguard natural ecosystems and biodiversity. With this, attention is turning to the role private and public companies can play in helping to build a more sustainable and resilient future for all.

This growing commitment to integrating ESG goals into business practices creates new considerations for PE firms as they look to build organizations that can successfully meet the growth and demand for this new accountability.

Identifying PE leaders who bring ESG knowledge and expertise will be a first step in creating a culture and fostering frameworks for new investment opportunities. While many firms may think about bringing in leadership from overseas, identifying talent locally with specific knowledge of the market, regulations and ESG-related activities can provide an advantage. This will only become more important as the Chinese PE landscape continues to evolve rapidly and the pace of innovation accelerates.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices