Sustainability as a Leadership Imperative | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Sustainability as a Leadership Imperative

Sustainable LeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Effectiveness

Article

Matt Guthridge

July 16, 2021

5 min

Sustainable LeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

Three ways boards and CEOs can place sustainability at the center of their decision making.

Close

Matt Guthridge

Melbourne

The pressure on companies to tackle environmental, social, and governance (ESG) issues continues to mount. A broad set of stakeholders— including customers, employees, investors and suppliers — are increasingly challenging companies to respond to concerns about climate change, the consumption of natural resources, changing societal values, and economic and political instability. Russell Reynolds Associates’ partnership with the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC) uncovered the importance of strong leadership from CEOs and boards in driving sustainable change – something we call Sustainable Leadership.1 The Sustainable Leadership model identifies the differentiating characteristics of sustainable leaders: multi-level systems thinking, stakeholder inclusion, disruptive innovation and long-term activation.

Despite the growing awareness that a focus on sustainability creates value over both the short- and long-term, many CEOs and boards are not responding rapidly enough to stakeholder concerns. Over the last year, some of the world’s biggest companies have been subjected to intensified stakeholder scrutiny over their performance on sustainability issues. Exxon Mobil’s shareholders recently voted to oust members of the energy company’s board following an activist campaign by a hedge fund known as Engine No. 1, which blamed the energy giant’s poor performance in recent years on its failure to transition to a “decarbonising world.” In May 2021, the Exxon shareholders approved three of the four board members Engine No. 1 nominated, dealing a major blow to the oil company. In another recent example, Rio Tinto’s destruction of the Juuken Gorge caves, which represented 46,000 years of culture and history for the Puutu Kunti Kurrama and Pinikura (PKKP) peoples of the Pilbara in Western Australia, resulted in significant public and investor backlash. Reports indicated that Rio executives were aware of the value of these caves, had the opportunity to preserve them, but still chose to destroy the shelters.2

Elsewhere in Australia, Woolworths Group planned to open a Dan Murphy’s megastore close to liquor-free Indigenous communities in Darwin, only to abandon plans after a backlash from Aboriginal and health groups. Following accusations Woolworths Group had failed to consult with local community organisations and had ignored concerns about the impact on public health, the retailer commissioned an independent panel to review health concerns and stakeholder engagement. The report found Woolworths Group failed to take into account the challenges facing Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory and did not meet the standards expected of a leading corporate citizen.3

While most companies (90 percent) in the ASX200 do report on sustainability practices, this practice alone does not help companies avoid costly sustainability-related decisions.4 Both Rio Tinto and Woolworths are considered “leaders” in their ESG reporting processes, but still failed to avoid their recent missteps. To explore how boards and CEOs can improve their approach to sustainability, Russell Reynolds Associates hosted an event attended by eleven board chairs from leading Australian companies. The discussion led to three important calls for action:

1. Driving sustainability starts with the company’s purpose.

A clear and compelling mission will feed into a sustainable corporate strategy, leading to sustainable returns for investors. The board has the responsibility for defining this purpose, ensuring a long-term vision beyond any management changes.

“Sustainability starts with a company’s purpose (why we exist). This informs everything the company does.” -Gordon Cairns, chair, Woolworths Group

Sustainability is therefore not a compliance exercise. Reporting on sustainability issues builds trust with customers, investors and other stakeholders by ensuring that the organisation is taking into consideration the environmental and societal impact of their operations. It creates transparency about the risks and opportunities an organisation faces. However, organisations also need to realize that sustainability reporting must be followed by action. This creates the accountability that ensures the organisation delivers on it’s commitments.

“It’s easy to get it wrong. For Woolworths, trying to establish a Dan Murphy store in Darwin impacted our social license. It wasn’t on the risk register, but should have been.” -Gordon Cairns, chair, Woolworths Group

2. Making sustainability core to the DNA of leadership teams is essential, but not enough: Boards and CEOs need “moral courage.”

For CEOs and board members to effectively integrate sustainability into business strategy and operations, they must transform the leadership culture of their organizations. Sustainability needs to become part of the fabric of the organization. In addition, CEOs and board members need to possess “moral courage”: the courage to do the right thing, despite its consequences.

“The presence of “moral courage” should become the pre-eminent leadership competence above all others. Currently, no board reviews, director assessments, recruitment or succession processes explicitly address the question whether leaders have moral courage. Going forward, we should.” -Stephen Langton, Board & CEO practice leader, Russell Reynolds Associates

3. Purpose, not simply profits, needs to be rewarded.

The board is responsible for establishing the metrics that will be used to determine promotion and remuneration throughout the organization. Today’s focus on short-term financial metrics needs to change to a broader set of financial and non-financial metrics to evaluate performance over longer time frames.

“Reputation has replaced Sales per square meter in our Long Term Incentive plans. This sends a message about what the company is serious about.” -Gordon Cairns, chair, Woolworths Group

Our conversations with leading chairs in Australia, and our broader research with CEOs and boards globally, make it clear that sustainability is first and foremost a leadership issue and an imperative to a company’s short- and long-term success. Leaders can be more effective in achieving their strategic priorities by embedding sustainability in their company’s purpose, making sustainability (and moral courage) core to the DNA of the organisation, and rewarding the achievement of purpose as opposed to simply profits. This, in turn, will support their long-term competitiveness, their relationships with their primary stakeholders, and their success in attracting the best next generation of talent.

Additional Authors

Marieke van der Drift leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Knowledge organisation in Asia Pacific. She is based in Singapore.

References

1. “Leadership for the Decade of Action.” Russell Reynolds Associates and United Nations Global Compact. 2020.
2. Never Again (aph.gov.au)
3. AFR, June 2021 “Woolworths’ mea culpa after Dan Murphy’s review finds major failures”
4. ACSI, 2020, ESG Reporting Trends in the ASX 200

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices