Digital Transformation in the Professional Services Sector | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Digital Transformation in the Professional Services Sector

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationLeadershipTransformation and InnovationTechnologyProfessional ServicesTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

September 30, 2021

4 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationLeadershipTransformation and InnovationTechnologyProfessional ServicesTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and Benchmarking

Executive Summary

Professional services firms help others through digital transformation – how well are they doing themselves?

Close

Professional services organizations are in high demand to help others through digital transformation efforts – how are they doing on putting these solutions into practice in their own systems?

“The pandemic has accelerated the move toward digitization and companies’ willingness to invest accordingly,” said David Andersen, a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ technology sector. “It has become almost an imperative for many organizations – including those within professional services – to transition to a more modernized workplace that enhances flexibility and productivity, while also optimizing for employee experience, impact to the customer, and alignment to business objectives.”

With the changing technological landscape and demand for digital transformation growing, will professional services organizations be able to stay ahead of their clients? To get a better sense of how professional services executives are thinking about this crucial topic, we recently surveyed 1,525 global board members, CEOs, C-suite executives and next generation executives, including 142 in the professional services sector.

What we learned was that while most professional services firms have been investing heavily in the past two years into areas of technological transformation, they may need to do more to maintain their edge.

Professional services executives are leaders in utilizing technology to improve the way work is done

Overall, professional services executives recognize the gravity of keeping pace with technological change, with 50% of sector leaders indicating that digital transformation is a top five business objective over the next 12 to 18 months,
compared to the global average of 46%. Furthermore, 71% of professional services executives feel that their leadership is prepared to handle digital transformation, slightly above the global average of 67%. Combined, these factors suggest that professional services organizations are well-poised to take advantage of digital innovation.

At an individual level, professional services leaders report personally using technology over the past two years to collaborate with their teams more often than their global counterparts. Specifically, they are more likely than others to use digital technology to:

Collaborate with other teams/functions

Redesign core processes

Improve efficiency of the team by leveraging technology/data

Professional services firms are less likely than others to invest heavily in new technologies or processes

Despite recognizing the importance and inevitability of digital transformation and innovation, professional services organizations may not be adequately building for the future. When asked about the extent to which they are currently investing in new technology offerings, professional services firms were slightly less likely than others to be spending heavily. This covers essential avenues for innovation, such as building new digital business models, products, or offerings and using digital technologies to launch new operational processes and ways of working.

Looking ahead

While executives in professional services have invested a large amount in technological innovation over the past two years, they may not be keeping pace for future growth

Of course, developing a solid digital strategy is only one piece of the puzzle when it comes to innovation and transformation. Identifying individuals who understand and evangelize digital products and processes is an important step; tasking them with driving key digital investments is another and using the technology to improve business performance is yet another.

Success in all these areas often hinges on the top leadership team. Building a team that works effectively together and has the right skills to tackle innovation is crucial to the success of the organization.

To address these points, professional services organizations should:

Review technology strategy regularly to ensure it is supporting business strategy

- As an executive team, review both high level technology plans and specific technology investments to ensure they are in alignment with organizational objectives and will not be derailed by potential obstacles.

Ensure that the right leaders are in place and empowered to support new technology areas

- Chief technology officers and chief digital officers are key assets in the fight to stay cutting edge. Make sure these executives have the right backgrounds and competencies to deliver what is needed now for the firm, and that their roles are structured with adequate authority to lead change.

Require additional technology expertise and understanding across the C-suite

-  Driving innovation through technology is the job of every leader in the firm. Reinforce the importance of staying informed on this area, offering formal or informal education to equip C-level executives and their teams to support enterprise-wide change efforts and spot new opportunities in their own areas.
- Build succession planning internally so that next generation leaders are prepared to take on areas of innovation and technological advancement in the future.

The professional services sector is known as a leader in technological innovation and change. By ensuring that they stay fresh on technological innovation and invest the right level of time and resources to staying ahead of the curve, they can maintain their competitive advantage in the market.

Author

Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices