Still Searching? The three things your business needs to do now to find the next-generation of leaders | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Still Searching? The three things your business needs to do now to find the next-generation of leaders

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipCEO Succession

Article

January 18, 2022

3 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipCEO Succession

Executive summary

Perhaps the only certainty of 2022 is that uncertainty will continue to shape the business landscape.

Close

So, it’s hardly surprising that many business leaders are starting the new year looking for answers – it’s a natural response to the turmoil of the last two years.

But I would urge that we take a step back – every good answer starts with a good question, and, for me, we need to stay in the question. We all want to pinpoint what makes great leadership in 2022 but, against the prevailing outlook of the global pandemic and economic instability, the answer is not fixed but fluttering on the winds of specific situations, many of which are evolving at a rapid pace.

Whatever your size or sector, staying in the question means embracing a spirit of experimentation, discovery, openness and adaption – if we’re going to find the right leadership qualities for each business, we need to work together. This is perhaps what excites me most about our journey in 2022.

If Job One for the new year is to stay in the question, Job Two must be to address the structural bias that can limit our collective ambitions. The acceleration of remote working is one of the most obvious societal silver linings of COVID-19 but, as businesses begin to work out how to remodel themselves in the wake of the pandemic, it’s critical that they don’t encumber themselves with solutions that exclude certain demographics.

As has been well documented, organisations are busy creating “new” structures to allow their staff to operate in new and different ways, but the danger here is that we revert to traditional practices. For example, presenteeism has historically favoured men so a new structure grounded in a traditional belief like the one above can quickly see a business going backward on inclusion.

If we want to keep the best talent, we need to allow staff to work in a multitude of different ways – and ensure that all, not just some, routes are heading in the direction of promotion and other rewards. This brings us back to the importance of staying in the question because the answer is rarely as simple as just “back to office” or “working from home”.

There’s clearly no right or wrong here. I have had several chats already this year with clients extolling the benefits of being back in the office and suddenly feeling more in the loop thanks to spontaneous and helpful conversations that would not have happened virtually. Equally, I have had other conversations with those who are embracing the opportunity for more flexibility and are eager for it to continue. The danger of a two-tier system emerging is great and the danger of that system being gender biased is even greater. A shifting landscape will only be successfully navigated with an agile approach.

Underpinning both of the tasks above is a third requirement for self-reflection. We’ve all had different experiences in the last two years, but how do we take these lessons forward in 2022? Most of us have realised that we are not all in the same boat – we’re in the same storm but in different boats.

What we have now is the opportunity to plot our own course and not necessarily follow the path of previous leaders. The world has changed forever, and the role models of the past don’t necessarily apply anymore. In 2022 we have the chance to be the leader our values want us to be and the fact that there’s no fixed formula for “right” isn’t a valid reason for not being the leader you want to be. There’s more than one way to achieve success – it’s time to be your own guru, be your own leader.

As we brace ourselves for another challenging but potentially rewarding year, I firmly believe that these three simple steps will help identify and nurture the next generation of leaders.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices