Governance in the Social Impact Sector | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Governance in the Social Impact Sector

Inclusive LeadershipLeadershipSocial ImpactBoard Effectiveness

Article

December 01, 2021

7 min

Inclusive LeadershipLeadershipSocial ImpactBoard Effectiveness

Executive summary

Drawing on lessons learned from the pandemic, social impact organizations are rethinking governance structures to be more flexible and inclusive.

Close

How the pandemic is changing unchangeable structures

In the social impact space, good governance is in the best interest of all stakeholders and should be regularly reviewed and refreshed. Yet in recent years, governance has emerged as a critical area of vulnerability for many global social impact organizations.

Governance failures can lead to organizational crises and are particularly dramatic for the social sector, which is under constant public scrutiny. As a sector that promotes ethics and often uses public money, it requires the highest degree of accountability. The negative impact of inadequate governance can take various forms, all of which are damaging.

Least dramatic impact

Most dramatic impact

In the most benign cases, inadequate governance processes inhibit boards from using their time efficiently. This can prevent a board from focusing on the right priorities and responding quickly to a changing environment

In the most dramatic cases, poor governance results in failures of duty of care the organization owes its partners. This damages the interests of the people the organization is intended to serve and fuels skepticism about the social impact sector as a whole

Good governance is therefore not just desirable—it is essential for the sector. While board structures and processes have been traditionally perceived as too rigid to adapt, the pandemic provided an opportunity to prove the contrary. This paper explores the reasons supporting governance rigidity, the pros and cons of changes implemented during 2021, and recommendations on how to successfully execute governance reforms.

Why is governance so difficult to adapt?

The lack of accountability in global social impact governance has led to a legitimacy crisis across the sector. Governance reform has been neglected or delayed, as it is often viewed as too difficult. Reasons for governance rigidity include concerns about cost and restrictions on how to invest funds, which make it difficult to devote resources to new initiatives. Global social impact boards also tend to be very large, and in-person meetings can be costly and burdensome.

Mistrust between stakeholders—mostly senior leadership teams and board directors, as well as among board directors—can also add to this rigidity, delaying communications and slowing decision-making. Moreover, discussions are frequently focused on the past, instead of looking towards the future. Finally, renewing, adapting, or reforming governance requires buy-in from all stakeholders, which can be challenging, particularly in large, complex global organizations.

Causes of governance rigidity include:

Cost

Agility is not free

Lack of flexibility in how to invest resources inhibits change, which requires new capability building and good communication

Trust

Lack of trust between management and boards, and within boards

Tension usually causes unwanted delays and demand from governors for more scrutiny

Narrative

Not asking the right questions

Narrative is often backwards rather than forward looking, which slows down governance innovation

Power games

Stakeholder inclusion

Without buy-in from people involved in the process, and without ensuring diversity of the team leading it, it will be very hard to implement change

Recently, there have been very public revelations of accountability failures among social impact organizations partly due to governance. These include accusations of sexual exploitation and bullying within Oxfam, most recently in the DRC1, and earlier in Haiti;2 Save the Children’s failures to deal with harassment claims against senior staff;3 Greenpeace activists boarding a North Sea oil rig in defiance of court orders;4 World Food Programme staff complaints about abuse of authority, harassment, and widespread discrimination5; and most recently, the EU suspension of funding to WHO programs in Congo following sex scandals6 . Combined with COVID-19, this misconduct has made change imperative in this sector.

Social impact boards often find it difficult to adapt due to their complex structures. These boards fall broadly into four categories: Representative, Multi-stakeholder, Hybrid, and Independent.

While every model has its benefits and constraints, the hybrid model could prove to be the model for the future, as it includes third-party/independent members and is not too large to manage, while still bringing together all the involved partners.

The governance of the “new new normal”

Despite the numerous work-related challenges brought by the pandemic—some threatening the very existence of social impact organizations—there were governance changes implemented by boards that resulted in significant improvements to traditionally rigid processes and structures.

While there are many benefits to virtual interactions, trade-offs need to be considered as we move to the “new new normal” (i.e., in the post-COVID era). One key challenge will be maintaining momentum beyond the sense of urgency COVID-19 created in order to fully embed the changes.

The pandemic proved that governance can be adapted. We expect that, in the post-2020 era, many organizations may want to redefine their governance structures.

Best practices implemented during the pandemic that should be retained:

Informal interactions: Loosening customary etiquette allows for more frequent and informal interactions, which foster trust and flexibility

Voting: Embracing informality increases decision-making efficiency

Inclusive scheduling: The ability to set meetings at different times allows all geographies to be included

Forgoing ‘coffee politics’: As people are more reluctant to lobby board members on contentious issues, teams function more cohesively

Trade-offs that need to be considered as we move the “new new normal”:

Difficulty in controlling the environment where people are having the meetings (e.g., public spaces or someone entering the room)

Unequal access to the internet and bandwidth issues

The lack of in-person interactions can make it more challenging to resolve difficult issues informally

Virtual meetings can lead to lower engagement, as individuals are often multi-tasking. This can cause inefficiencies and lack of buy in, especially from board members who were not as deeply engaged from the start

Our advice for governance reforms

The pandemic allowed organizations to reset basic governance structures. Embarking on continued governance reforms will be more effective than dismantling and creating new models. Building truly accountable systems can be painful and will involve challenging established ways of operating. However, without them, a critical part of global civil society may not survive.

When reforming governance structures, there are four key considerations to ensure a successful transformation:

Leadership: Courageous leadership challenging the current system without steering the entire reform

Communication: Transparent and open communication throughout the entire process

Process: A compelling and objective transformation process that includes independent advisors

Engagement: Sensitive and inclusive approach to gain support from all stakeholders

Below, we outline our six-step recommendations to help embed the four key areas above into governance reform processes:

01

02

03

Clear articulation

Leaders should clearly articulate the objectives and vision for transformation and how they envision the new governance structure

Scoping

Set boundaries of the governance reform to avoid “mission creep” and gradual shifts from the initial vision of the restructuring efforts

Staffing and resourcing

Ensure enough funding  is  available, and define a clear, thoughtful roadmap. Additionally, the people driving the reform must have passion and skills required for the transformation. Solicit legal advice early and often, as changing the organization’s by-laws will be critical when defining new rules and mandates

04

05

06

Inclusiveness

Ensure diversity in the team leading the reform, not just by gender, but across roles, skills, perspectives and geographies. Proactively create different channels for unsolicited input during the process

Transparency and trust

People should feel empowered to bring up concerns to the board. Also, it is important to thoughtfully consider how to deal with colleagues who were on the other side of a key decision and might feel disengaged from the organization

Continuous improvement

A review process should be established to assess the impact and performance of the new governance model every few years, ideally by an independent external party

Undertaking a governance reform is often a complex, politically charged transformation effort that should not be underestimated. The worst outcome is a situation in which the organization goes through painful change but achieves only marginal impact due to over-compromising.

Our key recommendation is to add third party or independent voices to boards, ensuring that the board directors or trustees are selected for their competencies and experiential skills. They will be invaluable in adding external perspective and experience, as well as impartial advice in steering the movement’s  future.  Regardless  of the type of board, best practice governance reviews and performance assessments should be undertaken every few years to ensure the board remains effective.

Additional authors

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education sector Knowledge team. She is based in Portland.

Vanessa Di Matteo is a member of the Knowledge team for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Education sector. She is based in London.

With thanks to the insightful comments and contributions of all RRA Governance Roundtable events participants.

References

1.	James Landale, “Oxfam: UK halts funding over new sexual exploitation claims”, BBC, April 7, 2021, Oxfam: UK halts funding over new sexual exploitation claims - BBC News
2.	“Aid sector ‘almost complicit’ in sex scandal, say MPs”, BBC, July 31, 2018, Aid sector ‘almost complicit’ in sex scandal, say MPs - BBC News
3.	“Save the Children ‘let down’ staff and public over harassment claims”, BBC, March 5, 2020, Save the Children ‘let down’ staff and public over harassment claims - BBC News
4.	Severin Carrell, “Greenpeace faces hefty fine after admitting defying court order”, The Guardian, February 24, 2020, Greenpeace faces hefty fine after admitting defying court order | Greenpeace | The Guardian
5.	Colum Lynch, “Popular U.N. Food Agency Roiled by Internal Problems, Survey Finds”, Foreign Policy, October 8, 2019, World Food Program Roiled by Discrimination and Abuse, Survey Finds (foreignpolicy.com)
6.	Stephanie Nebehay and Francesco Guarascio, “EU suspends funding to WHO programmes in Congo after sex scandal”, Reuters, October 28, 2021, Exclusive: EU suspends funding to WHO programmes in Congo after sexscandal | Reuters

Governance in the Social Impact Sector

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices