Remote Working in Private Equity | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Remote Working in Private Equity

FinancePrivate Capital

Article

May 06, 2022

3 min

FinancePrivate Capital

Close

Nadine Mensdorf

Frankfurt

Daniela Nienstedt

Frankfurt

Remote Working in Private Equity

The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly changed working life. In-person attendance from Monday to Friday, set working hours and a fixed workplace in the office appear to be a set-up of the past and flexible arrangements have already been established in many funds.

Moving towards a new normal

To understand the new work norms in a post COVID era in private equity (PE), Russel Reynolds Associates conducted a survey with our trusted PE sources in the DACH region to gauge their opinion on remote working and what they would like to see in the ‘new normal’.

01: Work norms in PE prior to COVID-19

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, around half of the survey participants already had the opportunity to work partially remotely. One third, however, stated that they had only been able to work remotely since the COVID-19 pandemic.

02: Work norms in PE in a post COVID-19 era

According to most of the participants, an average of 25% of the teams in PE are currently working remotely. Almost 50% of respondents answered that they would like to work remotely for one to two days. Less than 20% answered between three to four days or even five days would be desirable.

It is interesting to note that about 1/3 of the PE specialists responded that they would not like to see an increase in remote working after the COVID-19 pandemic. So, the ‘new normal’ is possibly dependent on the individual opinion of the employees and cannot be generalized for every company.

All respondents concurred that the fund they currently work for will have a new way of working after the pandemic. In the majority of cases, the change will liken a hybrid model of on-site office and remote work. Almost half of the PE specialists stated that the fund they work for even has a “work from anywhere” policy allowing employees to work flexibly from wherever they want.

03: Advantages and disadvantages of working from home

The benefits of remote working can be defined by two core tenets: 1) work life balance and 2) less travel time.

If we take a closer look at the aspect of work-life balance, there are several reasons that underlie its importance. The survey respondents often mentioned the time they had gained with their families and especially their children as an extremely positive aspect. In addition, private matters can often be dealt with more flexibly. The adaptability of working hours and the location of work was mentioned, as well as the possibility of being able to work in a highly concentrated manner in certain situations.

The travel time savings are related to both the morning commute to the office and the time spent travelling to external appointments. The commute every morning can be avoided and appointments with external parties can now be held online. Unnecessary time and cost wastage can be saved, and the added stress of constant travel has also been eliminated.

Although the increased work-life balance was mentioned as a positive aspect, about 50% of the respondents said that a clear separation of work and private life was no longer possible due to remote working during the pandemic.

The negative aspects of working remotely are mainly less interpersonal interaction with one's own team as well as the loss of individual coffee breaks to share private as well as professional experiences. Team communication and interaction suffers and maintaining the team spirit becomes increasingly difficult. Furthermore, one PE professional mentioned that brainstorming face to face would be more productive because one could not do other things virtually on the laptop at the same time.

04: Competitive advantage: Creating a desirable working environment as a fund

In order to stand out in the market and remain competitive, funds should dedicate more time on building team spirit, so that this can be maintained even when working remotely. Many of the respondents clearly stated that efficiency is higher, and they often concentrate better when working from home.

Nevertheless, a certain amount of time in the office on site is appreciated and also felt to be important in order to revive the team spirit and collaboration. Another aspect of improving the team spirit are team events that were cancelled due to the pandemic, and they should be revived. Home office, flexible working hours as well as the possibility to go to a centrally located office are perceived as important. Of equal importance is the investment in technology to support remote working. All in all, flexibility as a holistic construct of the new way of working is perceived by the PE professionals as attractive.

So, what is the conclusion? As always, there is no one size fits all solution. Going forward, funds will likely run hybrid models with an emphasis on the office vs. work from home time. While we have all seen the benefits of more flexibility, we have also seen the downsides of not having personal interaction.

Authors

Nadine Mensdorf is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Private Capital practice. She is based in Frankfurt.
Daniela Nienstedt leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services Sector in Germany. She is based in Frankfurt.
Hannah Klapheck supports executive searches for private equity funds as a researcher, she is based in Frankfurt.

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in the UK: Why Most Organizations Aren’t Ready

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices