CMO, CDO, & CCO Turnover Accelerates | Russell Reynolds

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CMO, CDO, and CCO Turnover Accelerates As Companies Seek To Drive Topline Growth

Customer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationConsumerTechnologyInnovation, Research, and DevelopmentTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Article

October 11, 2021

9 min

Customer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationConsumerTechnologyInnovation, Research, and DevelopmentTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Executive summary

Consumer and technology companies were significantly affected by COVID-19.  As a result, there is a rise in the movement of tech-savvy go-to-market roles globally.

Close

Norm Yustin

Chicago

Greg Hodge

London

It’s been over 18 months since the start of the pandemic and companies globally have started to come to terms with the importance of customer-centricity. COVID-19 has acted as a catalyst for organizations to lift historic and stagnant business models and rethink how they are going to reach consumers and customers more efficiently and more empathetically. As some regions regain their footing others are seeing a precipitous climb in case numbers and are returning to lockdown procedures. This seesaw of good and bad reflects the persistent uncertainty of the pandemic and if anything, proves to business leaders the importance of agility more than ever. Companies have acknowledged that their previous go-to-market efforts need not reflect the new consumer normal and are being forced to navigate new landscapes, implement new business models, create new organizational structures, and create new roles to better activate for their customers and consumers.

At the beginning of 2020, organizations were in a reactive mode, trying to get their feet underneath them and maintain business performance in a new environment. However, now a more strategic lens is being placed on the ever-changing situation. Given the disparity between regions, realigning business models to better activate for their customers is necessary. Now, organizations are not just trying to survive but trying to grow and different organizations need different types of leaders to complement their current talent pool. Over the past eight years, Russell Reynolds Associates has been tracking publicly disclosed chief marketing officer appointments and departures across North America. Since the second half of 2020, we expanded our analysis to include all go-to-market roles globally, including chief customer, growth, revenue, experience and digital officers, and others. This has enabled us to better understand the current trends and turnover of these executives, not to mention their increasing frequency: the number of publicly announced go-to-market moves grew to 2,062 appointments globally in the first six months of 2021.

Global Insights

Consumer & technology hires to drive the market

Consumer and technology companies were significantly affected by COVID-19. For consumer companies, COVID-19 challenged their business models, supply chain, and demand. Hospitality companies were forced to shut their doors, retailers had to shift to online models, and consumer packaged goods companies experienced a surge in demand for many products. On the contrary, as the demand for integrated technology permeates the market, technology companies have played an integral and critical role in the COVID-19 response. In the first half of 2021, this industry upheaval has been reflected in talent, as collectively the two industries accounted for 60 percent of go-to-market appointments globally.

It could be said that all companies must now be considered technology companies as organizations reprioritize digital and their relationship to the customer. Consumer organizations, especially, have had to act quickly as they seek to rebuild their business models with integrated technology and in turn have had the highest number of chief growth and chief digital officers, making up 37 percent and 36 percent of appointments across industries. This industry upheaval has created a pertinent need for new talent. Technology companies, on the other hand, have had to manage this major influx of revenue, think about future business development, and make sure their products can be leveraged across the industry with maximum compatibility. In turn, tech companies had the largest portion of hiring or appointing chief revenue and chief sales officers, making up 62 percent and 33 percent of appointments.

Chief growth and chief digital officers are back in vogue

In the second half of 2020 we recorded 63 appointments of chief growth officers and 47 appointments of chief digital officer, fast forward to the first half of 2021 and those numbers have risen to 149 moves for both functions, a collective rise of 271 percent. The driver behind this rise in appointments is the recognition that companies do not have the right talent to propel their business forward in a new customer-centric digital world.

Target veteran Christina Hennington was appointed to the newly formed position of chief growth officer in February 2021

The responsibility of the chief growth officer is typically to find new revenue streams and use insights to create new innovative go-to-market strategies. As an example, in February 2021, American retailer Target announced that company veteran Christina Hennington was stepping into the newly created role of EVP and chief growth officer. Her remit is to identify and pursue new revenue-generating strategies throughout the company. As CGO she has oversight of merchandising, which includes the company’s product design and global sourcing organizations, as well as enterprise strategy, insights, and innovation. One of her first initiatives in her role was to launch Ulta Beauty mini-shops within Target stores. The tie-up sees Target bring some of the biggest brands in beauty to its stores and reflects changing shopping dynamics in a post COVID world.

Debbie Ellison is Global Chief Digital Officer at VMLY&R COMMERCE

Chief digital officer titles have a broad remit, from traditional back-end technology through to front-end digital activation. In January VMLY&R COMMERCE, the end-to-end creative commerce company based in the UK announced the promotion of Debbie Ellison, chief digital officer Geometry UK, to Global Chief Digital Officer. Ellison’s brief, in the newly created role, is to create innovative, effective digital commerce solutions to support clients and their digital transformation across markets. The global position was introduced following a review of the company’s commerce strategies in light of the explosive growth of eCommerce as a result of the pandemic.

“Clients want outstanding creative innovation, powered by technology expertise and delivered at a global scale. Debbie’s new role is designed precisely to meet those needs and is another important step forward in accelerating our end-to-end commerce solution to drive client growth. Debbie has an intuitive and proven understanding of what consumers expect, what clients value, and what brands need. We’re thrilled to expand her talent and leadership across our global network,”

Beth Ann Kaminkow, global CEO, VMLY&R COMMERCE on the appointment of Ellison to the role.

New commercial skills required

On the front end of any business is its commercial engine. The disruption caused by COVID-19 has had industry-specific implications and has meant that businesses have discovered they do not have the right commercial talent for the new business reality they face. In healthcare and technology, companies have grown exponentially, the size of their revenue and the rapid growth of their commercial teams have created a demand to upgrade their commercial talent with leaders that can operate at scale. In the consumer sector, the shift of sales revenue from physical to digital channels has required a new type of commercial leader, one that can work tech-savvy and digitally enabled.

Following the recent launch of IFS Cloud, IFS announced the newly created role of Chief Commercial Officer, which was filled by Johan Made

An example of a company using customer-led innovation to pivot its go-to-market strategy is Sweden-based enterprise software firm IFS. The company announced the appointment of Johan Made as Chief Commercial Officer in April 2021. In the newly created role, Made is responsible for driving IFS’s growth strategy through inorganic investments and development initiatives, including mergers and acquisitions. The announcement followed a shift in the business model for IFS with the launch of IFS Cloud, which is designed to keep its customer “evergreen” and place the voice of the customer at the center of its business.

Gender balance across roles is uneven

Diversity, equity, and inclusion is a critical topic for all organizations and across all roles. Recent events have placed a spotlight on the gender and racial disparities across the globe and in turn have highlighted the business case for closing these gender and racial gaps in the workforce. Across all go-to-market roles globally, 73 percent of appointments were male. While this is a two percentage point decrease from the previous six months, organizations still have a long way to go in creating more equitable and inclusive workplaces.

Communications orientated roles are hiring more women than commercially orientated roles

When we break down the gender balance across the different roles, the balance is disrupted heavily by the commercially orientated roles. This fits a stereotype we see in the market where women are in more communications-orientated positions, and men are in more commercially-orientated ones. This is a stereotype that needs to be broken. For organizations to move the needle on this issue, it is important for leaders to think about talent and hiring in a less linear fashion. Whether this is by looking at a wider range of backgrounds or a more unorthodox profile, targeting specific roles can help organizations reach equilibrium.

The second half of 2021 is likely to see continued high levels of go-to-market moves. The shift in business models and the need to drive long-term sustainable growth, have required companies to look outside for talent. In the case of the technology and health sectors, the need for new commercial talent that can achieve ever-increasing revenue goals is paramount. Whilst in consumer, industrial and financial services the continued digitalization of their sectors, is demanding new tech-savvy talent. The reality of the increased demand for go-to-market roles is that industries are going to need to look outside their sector for the best talent.

In the first six months of 2021, just 26 percent of appointments were from out of the sector, down slightly from the six months prior (30 percent). Within roles, it is more tech-orientated roles and new commercial roles that see the highest levels of cross-industry pollination. Forty- seven percent of all chief digital officers and 40 percent of all chief growth officers were hired from out of the sector. As companies continue to enhance their digital muscles and refine their commercial engines, we can expect to see much of the same in the rest of the year.

Methodology

We tracked and analyzed 2,062 moves across North America (1,268), Europe, Middle East, and Africa (447); Asia Pacific (215); and Latin America (132).1  The roles consisted of chief commercial officer, chief customer officer, chief digital officer, chief experience officer, chief growth officer, chief marketing officer, chief product officer, chief revenue officer, chief sales officer, head of marketing and communications, and head of sales and marketing – encompassing all the senior go-to-market leaders within their respective functions. The bulk of the roles were made up chief marketing officer appointments (31 percent), followed by chief commercial officers (17 percent), chief revenue officers (14 percent), and chief product officers (9 percent). We used local language search tools to collate our research, combined with functional keyword searches in the English language. We attribute the fact that there are more moves in North America to the fact that there are fewer publicly announced leadership changes outside North America, the United States specifically, and the sheer weight of companies headquartered in the United States contributed to the most senior go to market leadership appointments occurring in the country.

Additional Authors

Katelyn Schoenholtz is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

1. Data was compiled via English-language searches in Factiva and may underreport announcements in EMEA, APAC, and Latin America if they were only made in local languages or not captured by Factiva.

CMO, CDO And CCO Turnover Accelerates As Companies Seek To Drive Topline Growth

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices