People, Planet, Profit: Changing the way portfolio company boards operate in a socially conscious and sustainable world | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

People, Planet, Profit: Changing the Way Portfolio Company Boards Operate in a Socially Conscious and Sustainable World

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernancePrivate CapitalBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessExecutive Search

Article

August 13, 2021

3 min

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernancePrivate CapitalBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Today’s portfolio company boards are increasingly focused on helping their businesses adapt for a new era of profitability, in a socially conscious world.

Close

Emily Taylor

New York
London

Kurt Harrison

New York

Today’s portfolio company boards are increasingly focused on helping their businesses adapt for a new era of profitability in a socially and environmentally conscious world.  Success means integrating sustainability-driven strategies to improve operational efficiency, corporate responsibility and long-term financial outperformance.

There is clear evidence that integrating ESG metrics and practices as a fundamental pillar of corporate strategy is an important step towards creating a strong global economy that commits to the “three P’s”—people, planet and profit.

Committing to ESG is not just the right thing to do; it is good for business. Sustainability is a critical lever for value creation. It influences business strategy throughout the transaction lifecycle and across portfolios, ultimately delivering better investments at exit.

According to BCG, organizations that perform strongest in specific ESG areas have margins that are up to 12% higher than median performers in these areas.

A study by BDO LLP showed 63% of UK private equity firms now consider ESG principles when making investments.

A McKinsey Global Survey found C-suite executives and investment professionals are prepared to pay an average 10% more for a company with a favorable ESG record compared to one with a negative record.

According to a recent MCSI 2021 Global Institutional Investor survey, 79% of investors in Asia-Pacific increased ESG investments ‘significantly’ or ‘moderately’ in response to COVID-19.

Pressure from LPs is also driving deeper commitments to ESG. “LPs are increasingly focused on non-financial performance metrics such as those on ESG and diversity,” said Rita-Anne O’Neill, a partner and co-head of the global private equity group at Sullivan & Cromwell LLP, in a recent Financier Worldwide article. “LPs want details beyond polices and initiatives. They want to see actual ESG performance at portfolio companies, and diversity at the investment professional and portfolio board level.”

ESG value creation starts at the top

Embracing ESG is not simply a case of creating a comprehensive set of metrics, it is a way of doing business. It takes concerted effort and committed leadership to ensure that this approach resounds throughout the organization, with support at every level.

At the board level, directors must play a critical role in steering efforts and people in the right direction. Success for ESG lies within the trifecta of strong leadership at the top, commitment across the team and a strong framework and reporting capability throughout the company.

What should portfolio boards look for when assessing leaders?

In sourcing talent, C-suite leaders and board directors need to identify executives with the right skillsets to thrive in today’s evolving landscape: a balance of strong business acumen a focus and passion for environmental and social issues.

Our research shows that there is a set of differentiating leadership attributes that fuel sustainable leaders’ success: They combine a sustainable mindset with four critical capabilities:

Multi-level systems thinking—The ability to incorporate the interplay of business, societal and environmental systems and drive decisions that turn sustainability into a competitive advantage.

Stakeholder influence—They do not seek to manage stakeholders, rather they actively include them in defining and actioning decisions.

Disruptive innovation—They possess the courage to challenge traditional approaches and cut through bureaucracy to drive the disruptive innovation needed to do away with the profitability- sustainability trade-off.

Long-term activation—They do not simply have an orientation towards the long term, they set bold sustainability goals and rigorously drive concerted action in their pursuit. Strong leadership is an imperative to a more sustainable world

ESG is a value driver that will continue to grow in importance. Firms that put it at the heart of their business strategies will be the market leaders in driving the new sustainable economy. The path forward is through strong leadership that understands the critical intersection of doing good for our planet and people while also driving strong returns.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices