Making the most of the Asian Century | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Making the most of the ‘Asian Century’

Leadership StrategiesCulture RiskBoard and CEO Advisory

Article

October 27, 2021

5 min

Leadership StrategiesCulture RiskBoard and CEO Advisory

Executive Summary

Expanding into Asia is no longer about setting up operations as an ‘outpost’ to a Western headquartered multinational and running ‘business as usual.’

Close

Understanding the complexity of Asia is key for sustainable long-term growth

To be successful and create a profitable business in Asia, organizations need to think long-term and beyond China. They need to be committed to understanding the nuances across this complex grouping of very different countries and markets. Focusing solely on what has made Western organizations successful will not be enough. To ensure Asian businesses thrive will require a shift in mindset and a rethink in business operating models.

The ‘Asian Century’ is upon us. Asia is now the world’s largest and fastest-growing regional economy, on track to top 50 percent of global GDP by 2040. Currently, 44 percent of international students are Asian, 119 of the world’s 235 unicorns are Asian, and 50 percent of the growth in consumer consumption over the next decade will be in Asia.

Of the Fortune Global 500, being the 500 largest companies in the world, Asia Pacific already today dominates with over 46% representation, with China now the largest country in the Fortune Global 500:

These staggering statistics have made their way into the boardrooms of corporations worldwide, and  many are developing plans to capitalize on the ‘Asian Century.’  But expanding into Asia is no longer about setting up operations as an ‘outpost’ to a Western headquartered multinational and running ‘business as usual.’

The Asian market is complex and segmented

Many organizations have focused their Asian operations around China. However, the growth story in Asia is so much more than China despite it ranking first in global GDP. Asia has most of the fastest-growing economies in the world with India ranked the world’s third-largest economy by purchasing power parity (PPP) standards, followed by the ASEAN region, soon to be the world’s fourth-largest economy.

These four Asian countries that are to sit within the largest five economies in the world by 2030 are distinctly different to each other, both in terms of culture as well as their business practices. Each country represents different opportunities as their consumer markets, supply chains, technology/innovation, businesses, and talent are varied in their development and potential.

Adding to the complexity of the broader Asia Pacific landscape, it is essential to intimately understand the distinct business climate and uniqueness of each market. As an illustration, China’s economy is predominantly driven by state-owned (SOEs)and private-owned enterprises (POEs).  India is built upon family-owned businesses, a tradition that continues today. Whereas in Australia, the marketplace evolves around public listed companies. Leaders of these varied business models think and operate differently, which impacts how business is conducted, measured, and performs.

For a successful business model to succeed in these varied markets requires organizations to consider their leadership and risk tolerance. Above all, they must be willing to invest long-term into understanding the different cultures and what it takes to build successful sustainable business relationships.

Cultural Disconnect: A Historical Barrier to Success in Asia

For more than two centuries, Western businesses have been doing business in Asia. The typical business model included moving managers from their homeland and “posting” them to China, India, Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Japan for brief periods.  Leadership often lived in expatriate communities, where they could socialize with other Westerners.

While this model has been successful for some, it is also rife with challenges.  Relationships in Asia are traditionally built on trust and loyalty, qualities that take time and humility to develop. But pressure from head office to deliver ROI often took precedent over long-term investments to build lasting relationships. As a result, these Western companies ended up driving Asian markets from afar instead of growing local leaders to develop and lead their own markets.

As varied and as complex as these markets may be, there are several common core strategies that can be implemented for success:

Put Boots on the Ground

To truly understand the complexities of these distinct Asian markets, companies need to invest time and talent into educating people who will suitably represent their interests abroad. The first step is to be present. We have seen time and again, leaders of Asian-owned enterprises are very willing to visit countries outside their region to learn the languages and culture, all while practicing humility, which is a trait that helps foster the strong relationships necessary to succeed.  This ‘boots on the ground’ approach is paying off. Asian companies have been quick to establish themselves in emerging markets including Africa and the Middle East. Being physically present and open to playing student rather than the teacher is the way Western organizations can accelerate their growth in Asia.

Cultivate resilient, adaptable leaders

Western leadership often arrives in Asia with the mindset that business will be conducted as usual, aside from a few cultural customs thrown in to show respect. To be truly successful, leaders need to think and operate differently in developing business relationships in specific and separate Asian markets. Understanding that relationship building in Japan is totally different to India, for example, requires leaders who can acknowledge, learn, and thrive in these individual markets.

Leaders who are resilient and demonstrate the ability to quickly adapt are key. Choosing leaders who bring an authentic curiosity about a county will contribute to building lasting trust and loyalty that cannot be built through superficial gestures.  Leaders who are genuinely interested and eager to learn to reveal the respect that lays the groundwork for building long-term business relationships.

Set realistic expectations for ROI

CEOs of companies doing business – or setting up business in Asian markets – are under pressure to demonstrate a measurable return on investment. This pressure can be immense when running one or multiple operations in this very complex and segmented marketplace. The greatest challenge, particularly for tomorrow’s CEOs, will be in setting realistic expectations for each Asian market segment.  Building relationships and businesses in Asia takes time, sometimes decades. With knowledge and understanding of the complexity of doing business in these markets, CEOs can guide organizations and their Boards to realistic expectations regarding when the investment will pay off.

As organizations plan their expansion into Asia or rethink their footprint across such a complex region, CEO’s and Boards should consider the following questions:

How dependent is our organization on Asia now? Will this change in the future?

Are we ready to invest in long-term education to fully understand the distinct market segments?

What is our knowledge of Asia? Do we have experts on the Board? Do we have a “real” Asia experience?

How does the massive growth in APAC impact our global businesses located elsewhere? Do we need to move our headquarters in response to this growth?

How does the growth of APAC impact our talent and leadership strategy? Will we hire in-country? Will we export leadership and talent to Asia?

In this Asian Century, organizations that are ready to truly understand the varied segments of these vast markets will find real opportunities to succeed in this next world economy.  Developing empathetic and authentic leaders who want to study, learn, and embrace the cultural and business nuances of each market will find Asia open, welcoming, and profitable.

Making the most of the ‘Asian Century’: Understanding the complexity of Asia is key for sustainable long-term growth

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices