Investor Activism Dons Different Mantle | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Investor Activism Dons Different Mantle

Next Generation BoardsInclusionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchInclusion and CultureBoard Effectiveness

Article

April 12, 2022

5 min

Next Generation BoardsInclusionEnvironmental Social and GovernanceLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchInclusion and CultureBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

In this new age of stakeholder capitalism, investor activism has evolved to take on a more compassionate form, less of a greed-driven takeover.

Close

New form embraces concept of shared values between businesses and stakeholders of sustainability, diversity and inclusivity.

Activism used to be associated with corporate raids and leveraged buyouts, immortalised by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar’s expose on RJR Nabisco. Their article, “Barbarians at the Gate” showcased how investor activists, through the acquisition of a large stake in a business, used their voting rights to compel the board and management to undertake corporate actions to their own advantage.

Demands for better governance

In this new age of stakeholder capitalism, investor activism has evolved to take on a more compassionate form, less of a greed-driven takeover. Demands for greater transparency and disclosure around business practices have increased calls for corporate accountability.

Today, stakeholder activism has taken on the mantle of sustainability, diversity and inclusivity. The new form of activism embraces the concept of shared values between businesses
and stakeholders within the ecosystem. Shareholders are not the only ones clamouring for change; society at large has pushed to get its voice heard through pressure on institutional investors.

The Black Lives Matter movement in the US forced into the open discussions on governance and leadership diversity beyond gender. And the economic disruption caused by the spread of Covid-19 has sparked many boardroom conversations across the globe on the welfare of lower- wage employees. Businesses now have real skin in the game.

Amazon's treatment of its workers made headlines when it was alleged to have failed to adequately protect its employees and provide a safe working environment. This was exacerbated by the media storm that followed when further allegations emerged that the company had fired the whistleblowers who raised this concern.

JPMorgan's lead independent director Lee Raymond (former CEO of ExxonMobil) was forced to step down from the board at the end of 2020 when climate activists and investors focused attention on JPMorgan's poor record of responding to climate change. The activist investors included big names such as New York City's pension fund.

Growing activism in Asia

While activism in Asia is traditionally perceived to be more muted than in the mature Western markets, things may be changing. With the increase in the flow of funds into the region, there is growing momentum for change – in part led by institutional investors who have committed to the UN-supported Principles for Responsible Investment. They have set their sights on many family businesses and state-owned enterprises in Southeast Asia, which are now finding it more important than ever to respond to the emerging demands for stronger governance and ethical business practices.

Top Glove, the Malaysia-based glove manufacturer, which has seen its share price rise on the back of Covid-fuelled demand for its products, was flagged by investment firm BlackRock as having not done enough “to manage risks including the health and safety of workers living in its dormitories”. To make the point that it held the board responsible, BlackRock subsequently voted against the re-election of six independent directors during Top Glove's 2021 Annual General Meeting.

As businesses grapple with the economic fallout from the wake of the pandemic, boards need to recognise that stakeholder primacy has gained traction and gone mainstream. This has, in turn, helped activism become a constructive force for good. So, instead of dismissing the entire lot as troublemakers, there is value for boards to reflect on the issues raised by activists and understand their points of view. If they are legitimate, it only makes sense to engage them and work together to find solutions that address their concerns.

Proactively preparing for activism is something boards can do to minimise unexpected attacks. In particular, now that environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues are firmly on the boardroom agenda, boards need to plan and prepare to engage activists who are likely to scrutinise the company's sustainability and other business practices. Beyond monitoring and reporting metrics, it may also be worthwhile to simulate the board and management's response to such reactions through scenario planning.

From barbarians to crusaders

That said, activism need not be confined to actions as overt as boardroom coups or shareholder revolts. Simply participating in public consultations, or even stepping up and getting more involved in corporate governance associations (like the Singapore Institute of Directors) can be some of the more subtle ways to effect change.

Already the power of influence can be seen in the boardroom with boards starting to become more diverse and inclusive, through the efforts of like-minded individuals who have organised themselves around the belief that there is value in diversity among directors. A case in point is Goldman Sachs CEO David Solomon, who, during an interview with CNBC in January 2020, stated that the bank would help companies go public only if they have at least one diverse board member.

Activism today is less about being anti-establishment than about being pro-cause. What we are seeing is an awakened generation's desire to be more actively involved in defining what their world will look like. Perhaps in time, activists would be seen less like barbarians at the gate but rather as crusaders for better governance.

Alvin Chiang is a member of the Advocacy and Research Committee of the Singapore Institute of Directors.

This article was first published in the Boardroom Matters column by the Singapore Institute of Directors in The Business Times in May 2021

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices