Leadership in  a Crisis: A Conversation with Jodi Hubler | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Leadership in a Crisis: A Conversation with Jodi Hubler

InclusionLeadershipHealthcare

Article

Noël Auguston

November 08, 2021

3 min

InclusionLeadershipHealthcare

Executive summary

The COVID-19 pandemic has affected everyone on both a personal and a business level. During this time, women leaders have stepped up to the challenges.

Close

Noël Auguston

Boston

Jodi Hubler brings a dynamic background to the roles she has held as a VC investor and, most recently, as President of Bind, a health insurance company looking to disrupt the healthcare market. Hubler had been a Bind board member since its founding in 2016, and joined the company as president in. 2019. She was previously CEO/Managing Director of Lemhi Ventures, a health care services venture capital fund with $385 million under management.

During her 25-year career, Hubler has held executive positions in both public and private sector companies, including Cargill, Alcoa, and Definity Health. In talking with her — our conversation touched on everything from growing up in Iowa and cutting her teeth in Washington D.C., to the challenges of women leaders and the changing dynamics of the healthcare industry — Hubler frequently circled back to how important it is to encourage women leaders to be bold.

Here are just two highlights of our conversation.

On Leadership in a Crisis

There is no shortage of studies, papers, and opinions on differences between male and female leaders, particularly in times of crisis. From Hubler’s perspective, the COVID-19 pandemic has been a demanding test case that plays to the strengths of female leaders. It was, and still is, the rare challenge that affects everyone on both a personal and a business level, and female leaders clearly stepped up to the challenges.

During our conversation, Hubler cited a December 2020 article in the Harvard Business Review, in which Jack Zenger and Joseph Folkman highlighted research conducted early in the COVID crisis that found women made better business leaders than men during the pandemic. Female leaders scored higher in 13 of 19 competency metrics. Zenger and Folkman concluded:

[Employees] want leaders who are able to pivot and learn new skills; who emphasize employee development even when times are tough; who display honesty and integrity; and who are sensitive and understanding of the stress, anxiety, and frustration that people are feeling. Our analysis shows that these are traits that are more often being displayed by women.

One of the most important takeaways was how the pandemic accentuated some of the most positive traits women leaders offer. “This research confirmed what we have seen before: female leaders were more willing to pause amid the crisis, to be vulnerable and authentic in acknowledging with empathy what was happening,” Hubler said. “In the early days of the pandemic, is took courage to say we don’t know what we don’t know, but we’re going to work through this together.”

It was this ability to normalize the situation and communicate openly with employees and customers that Hubler believes were the biggest leadership differentiators. Female leaders were particularly adept at enabling their organizations to focus on the needs of the business while also supporting employees’ self-care at home with family.

On Challenging Investment Bias

Along with discussing leadership during the pandemic, Hubler provided insights into the differences she has seen between companies with male versus female leaders in the healthcare space. One of the biggest challenges is the gender gap in funding.

Female-led companies have long received less capital to grow their businesses than companies with male founders.

“There are many ways to rationalize investment bias, but it something we must reconcile,” Hubler said. “Growing data on the effectiveness of female leaders from the C-suite to the Board suggests that investors have a tremendous amount to gain by paying more attention to the gender balance of the companies and leaders they hire, invest in, and support.”

Closing the gap will happen one investor, one company, one leader at a time. Hubler mentioned in our discussion she has seen an increase in the number of women in venture firms, more mentoring among women leaders, and greater respect for authenticity and vulnerability as leadership traits.

“I’m beginning to see women [leaders] create that vital few,” Hubler said. “They — we — work collaboratively. We create groups to come alongside and support one another, invest in one another,  take risks together.”

She also sees networks of  women in business leadership as a vital source of support for younger and mid-career women with the drive and talent to identify needs and then start and grow companies to address those needs.

“Many of the female healthcare leaders I meet have begun thinking bigger about themselves and the work they do,” said Hubler. “They aren’t worrying as much about titles or positions, but instead are focusing on driving change and the impact they can have on the healthcare ecosystem. They are building a legacy.”

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices