At the Hub: How Communications and Corporate Affairs Leadership is Evolving | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

At the Hub: How Communications and Corporate Affairs Leadership is Evolving

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionConsumerExecutive Search

Article

September 20, 2021

5 min

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionConsumerExecutive Search

Close

Jennifer Doidge

San Francisco

TR Straub

Washington DC

In a dynamic and tumultuous world, chief corporate affairs officers and chief communications officers face no
shortage of challenges in managing their organizations’ reputations. To learn more about how the role is evolving, we recently spoke with T.R. Straub and Jennifer Doidge, leaders in Russell Reynolds Associates’ Corporate Affairs practice, about what they’re seeing in the talent market for these increasingly important roles.

Since the beginning of the pandemic, corporate leaders have had to address a wider range of issues
than ever before – employee wellbeing, social justice, corporate reputation and sustainability, to name a few. How are the roles of corporate communications and corporate affairs leaders changing in response?

Jennifer Doidge: More and more CEOs and leadership teams are turning to these executives, looking for strategic counsel to help the company respond to ever-changing circumstances. All of the events of the last 18 months have pushed the executive team and board of directors to think differently about reputation. They  are  asking  questions like: “Are we approaching this correctly, considering
all implications?” ”Are we investing  enough  in  the function?” “Have we handled or anticipated these issues appropriately?” and of course, “Do we have the right people in the right roles?”

With that, the skill set required of a chief communications officer or corporate affairs head is adjusting a bit. It’s now incredibly important to have the ability to think like
a business leader, and not wait to be told what to do but rather have a view on how the function might drive and better support business objectives.

The balance of stakeholder influence seems to be shifting as well. Your recent research shows that
employees are on par with customers when it comes to determining a company’s reputation – and both of them are ahead of investors and other external audiences. Does this mean internal and external communications are in essence the same now?

T.R. Straub: Internal employee engagement often used to be a secondhand consideration for a communications
leader, but it’s really come to the forefront over the last year because of the pandemic and social justice issues, along with sustainability. These are all issues that employees
care about, along with customers and other external stakeholders.

There’s also a growing appreciation that reputation management is often best led by an ‘inside out’ approach, where employees are galvanized to advocate on the company’s behalf. That means alignment on internal and external messaging and approach are critical now, more than ever. With a more distributed workforce, the tools and channels used to reach employees also have to become more sophisticated. We see more investment in employee mobile platforms, real-time messaging and internal
chats that mimic the digital platforms used for external audiences.

What about the need for companies to respond more often to political dynamics and controversies?

T.R. Straub: In this super-charged political environment, having a public affairs perspective – both international and domestic – regarding how a company‘s actions tie into partisan conversations is increasingly important.
These dynamics are not clear cut, especially for companies with expansive geographic footprints with polarized constituencies.

Jennifer Doidge: With technology companies in particular, we’re seeing strong interest in candidates who have
direct political experience working for a campaign or governmental leader. These professionals understand campaign-driven communications, how things play in DC and state capitals, and typically have strong issues management skills.

Given the broad remit of CCOs and CCAOS, do you see the need for more cross-functional
collaboration?

T.R. Straub: Without a doubt. As a corporate affairs leader, you have to think and operate cross functionally. You have to understand the CFO’s world, the CHRO’s world, and the rest of the C-suite – and then understand how to message, engage and persuade their stakeholders. There’s a significant element of being a connector across the enterprise.

Jennifer Doidge: It really is a hub role. This is the person who has the holistic view and stitches it all together with a thoughtful perspective and coherent approach.

Looking ahead, how might these CCO and CCAO roles evolve in the next year or two?

T.R. Straub: The headline is that they are increasingly senior, with more executive visibility,  and  the  stakes are higher, with increased demands on transparency as decisions and operations are more in the spotlight.

Jennifer Doidge: Especially now, companies want someone in this role to help them think differently than they have before and push the envelope. We expect to see even more of these leaders move across industries – bringing different perspectives and skillsets that challenge a typical industry approach.

What advice might you have for an aspiring CCO or CCAO?

T.R. Straub: Focus on building your business acumen and ensure you maintain a cross-functional mindset, balancing both internal and external dynamics. Develop and evolve your expertise deliberately; chief corporate affairs officers tend to start with one piece of the puzzle and grow over time. Find your passion and expertise, then leverage that to continue to grow your career and impact.

Jennifer Doidge: Earn a seat at the table so that communications/corporate affairs is a part of strategic discussions where reputation-impacting decisions are being made. Bring a business-first mindset to conversations and ensure your communications agenda aligns with business objectives. And build and deepen your cross-functional relationships – with marketing, legal, risk, etc. – who will be key partners as your influence grows in the organization.

Author

Jennifer Doidge co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Corporate Affairs practice. She is based in San Francisco.
T.R Straubco-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Corporate Affairs practice. He is based in Washington, D.C.
Alix Stuart is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Boston.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices