What Do Boards Look For in Directors Today? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

What do Boards Look For in Directors Today?

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipCareer AdviceLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair SearchInclusion and Culture

Article

September 15, 2021

4 min

Next Generation BoardsSustainable LeadershipCareer AdviceLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair SearchInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

The expectations of boards are changing— and so are the skills that directors need to thrive.

Close

Pressures on corporate boards members and chairs have increased significantly in recent years. Alongside traditional duties around corporate governance and compliance, today’s board directors must also navigate big, thorny issues relating to sustainability, DE&I, innovation, and digital transformation.

Whether you already serve on a board or are looking for your first board role, it is important to understand how expectations on board members are shifting.

We look at the traits and skillsets that are in high demand today.

A sustainability mindset

Sustainability has quickly climbed to the top of the corporate agenda. A broad set of stakeholders—investors, customers, employees, and communities—increasingly expect businesses to play a critical role in addressing societal challenges. At the same time, there is mounting evidence that sustainable business practices boost financial performance and shareholder value. Doing good is inexorably linked to doing well.

Sustainability is now a leadership imperative. All directors should now be able to engage with the challenges and opportunities around sustainability—and help pivot their organizations towards a more environmentally conscious, equitable, and profitable future.

Working with the United Nations Global Compact, we recently defined the specific skills that board directors will need if they are to embrace their role as changemakers and drive real progress towards sustainability outcomes:

A Sustainable Mindset: Firmly believes that both sustainability and profit are in the organization’s best long-term interest.

Multi-Level Systems Thinking: Integrates economic, societal, and environmental factors into a purpose-driven strategy, turning sustainability into a competitive advantage

Stakeholder Inclusion: Understands and incorporates viewpoints from all key stakeholders to drive decision making and share the benefits.

Disruptive Innovation: Delivers breakthrough innovations and business models that create value for all stakeholders, continually challenging traditional approaches

Long-term Activation: Sets audacious business and sustainability goals, driving concerted action and investments, and stays the course in the face of setbacks or push-back from short-term oriented stakeholders.

The courage to champion diversity at all levels

In a recent Russell Reynolds Associates’ survey, 67% of NomCo chairs said DE&I expertise is important for new board directors. One director we interviewed, who serves as a nominating and governance committee chair, asks director candidates “how they advance greater D&I in their various walks of life. […] If they say it can’t be done, that is concerning. A fatalistic response is a sure death. They won’t be helpful and may be obstructionist. So, they’re a burden not worth putting on the board.”

Today’s board leaders must be avid champions of diversity at all levels. This includes increasing the diversity of slates for CEO roles and other senior executive teams, ensuring succession plans identify a diverse pool of future leaders, and creating mentoring programs to unlock the potential of the entire employee base and prepare people of all backgrounds for leadership positions. It also means working to improve the diversity of the board itself.

Increasingly, directors also need to help lead conversations about the company’s political position and societal activities. This can be a complex issue to navigate. As one director told us, it requires the “courage to challenge, to be curious and to be prepared to do things that are maybe not fully embraced by shareholders.” The ability to pick when, where, and how to engage with issues will be critical.

An ability to build robust relationships with senior management

The relationship between board directors and senior management is critical to success in today’s fast-paced world. When we analyzed more than 350 supervisory directors across 12 countries, we found that highly effective board directors were 41% more likely to actively cultivate relationships with the broader executive management teams. This gave directors a better understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of business units. They were able to ask better questions, demonstrate better judgment on strategic issues, and constructively challenge management, when appropriate. No wonder that boards are increasingly looking for directors who can foster effective relationships with top teams, while also maintaining their objectivity, independence and oversight role.

The capacity to adapt and stay nimble

The Covid-19 pandemic challenged corporate boards in unforeseen ways. While many boards rose to the occasion, others found themselves unable to contribute or even causing unnecessary distractions. For example:

Directors whose skills and experiences couldn’t keep pace when the company rethought strategies or pivoted to new products, services, and operating models.

Over-boarded directors who couldn’t be counted on to show up for multiple crisis meetings.

Sitting CEO and CFO directors who must necessarily pay attention to their own business first.

Directors with too much time on their hands who overstepped into operations, wasting management’s limited time and resources.

Today’s board directors must remain abreast of current issues and challenges and focus on forward-looking, value-creating strategic issues. This means going beyond review and compliance responsibilities to complete strategic planning or review, providing oversight on major transactions and C-suite succession planning, as well as engaging in enterprise risk review, board refreshment activities, and crisis management scenario planning. Now more than ever, boards need future-ready leaders who understand how the world is changing—and are ready to act.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices