Aligning Technology and Customer Functions in the Post-Pandemic Paradigm | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Aligning Technology and Customer Functions in the Post-Pandemic Paradigm

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsCulture RiskInclusionTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Article

+ 1 author

November 15, 2021

8 min

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsCulture RiskInclusionTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Executive summary

As organizations integrate technology and customer functions, new power balances and talent implications arise.

Close

Katrien Demeester

Brussels

Art Hopkins

Atlanta

Greg Hodge

London

Norm Yustin

Chicago

In this paper, we look at how organizations have integrated their technology and customer functions through a ‘balance of powers’ to streamline accountability, and the types of leadership needed to make these changes.

“Every company is a software company.” Or at least according to Forbes in 2011, and this was not by any means the first
eye-catching headline in the market. Technology companies and sector verticals are converging rapidly: retailers are now
eCommerce platforms, traditional automotive companies are experimenting with autonomous vehicles and telematics
software, primarily holding a digital bank account is no longer considered quirky, and physicians are a mere Zoom call away.

To advance technology, organizations initially focused their efforts on innovation (to meet disruption head-on) and
customer functions (to build out omnichannel and digital go-to-market strategies). Organizations began to remove the
divide between their digital programs and traditional IT delivery systems by consolidating them into a single technology
operating model.1 In 2018, 18% of technology leaders said their companies had either converted their digital and IT teams
to a single operating model or developed a fully digital model; by 2020, this number had almost doubled.2 However,
organizations are quickly realizing that this is not enough. Simply creating a single technology operating model does not
necessarily build the right customer activation platforms, nor does it guarantee a streamlined integration. Technology
and customer functions are often misaligned as platforms are opportunistically created. Furthermore, digital complexity
is creating confusion; organizations are uncertain how to embed digital capabilities and discern what type of technology
leader is needed, often hiring a flashy technology leader without additional thought to scope or structure.
A deeper, more complex, and intentional integration is required today, one that simultaneously considers structure
and talent, to ensure that customer and technology functions partner effortlessly and design a frictionless end-to-end
customer journey for increasingly sophisticated customers.

Organizations need to implement an appropriate structural archetype, aligned to their business model, that ensures cross-functional connectivity across the customer lifecycle, from technology and digital solutions to product offerings, marketing,
and sales. This connectivity will enable flatter, faster teams to prioritize creativity, speed, and accountability – three
non-negotiables for innovation and technological advancement.3 In determining the right structure, it is also important to
simultaneously discuss roles and responsibilities and streamline reporting lines. This means focusing accountability on
one or two prominent leaders, instead of having an array of executives with overlapping remits, causing teams to answer to
multiple bosses.4 Go-to-market leaders are key here; these leaders need to harness their unique perspective on customer
demands, behaviors, and digital platforms and champion cross-functional connectivity across the broader organization.

To understand how technology and customer functions can be advanced meaningfully, Russell Reynolds evaluated market-leading organizations, distinguished in their technology structure, customer-activation capabilities, and/or go-to-market
digital platforms. The analysis highlighted four structural archetypes, each with a distinguishing balance of power between
core considerations: a technology-weighted model, a consumer-weighted model, an equally-weighted model (between
technology and consumer), and a product-weighted model. Each structural archetype has its own talent implications
around accountability and role responsibility spanning a spectrum of core expertise, including the chief information officer
(CIO), chief technology officer (CTO), chief digital information officer (CDIO), chief technology digital officer (CDTO), chief
digital officer (CDO) or multichannel leader, chief digital marketing officer (CDMO), or chief marketing officer (CMO) or
brand leader. These structural archetypes are continuously shifting with the business landscape; organizations that initially
began with the technology-weighted model may have evolved to an equally-weighted model, depending on consumer
demand and business strategy. Roughly a third of the organizations included in this analysis have since shifted their model
in the past four months. Using the concept of balance of power, with an agile culture, organizations will be able to better
integrate technology and customer functions.

What leaders feared…is that their companies were organized for a world that is
disappearing—an era of standardization and predictability that’s being overwritten
by four big trends: a combination of heightened connectivity, lower transaction costs,
unprecedented automation, and shifting demographics.5

Organizing for the Future: Nine Keys to Becoming a Future-ready Company, McKinsey & Company

Figure 1: Integration of customer and technology functions

In the customer functions, there has been an influx of new roles. Over the past six months, 17% of appointments were
to newly created roles in a given organization, such as chief growth officer, chief customer officer, or chief revenue
officer. As digital transformation becomes a top priority for organizations, leaders are forced to not only have frontend
capabilities but also the ability to understand data, analytics, and back-end systems more fluently.

In the technology functions, single leaders are taking on the remit of all technology and digital from data, security,
engineering, and IT to digital customer touchpoints and occasionally digital product development. This requires customer-centric leaders capable of stepping up to a leadership role, often sitting on the executive committee
and reporting to the CEO. The titles of these roles are almost irrelevant, with the difference between CIOs, CTOs,
CDOs, and any combination of the three dematerializing over time.

50% of chief customer officer appointments over the last six months were to newly
created roles.6

The Pandemic has Created New Opportunities for Customer-Centric Leaders, Russell Reynolds Associates

Russell Reynolds proposes using the concept of balance of power as organizations discuss the realignment of functions
to flatten the hierarchy and streamline accountability. The balance of power between technology, consumer, digital, and
product most commonly take place in one of four core ways:

Designing a technology-weighted model: The technology remit expands into the areas of product, advanced analytics, and enterprise transformation, subsuming what would have been the chief digital officer role.

Designing a consumer-weighted model: The customer remit is combined with digital to make a holistic customer-focused role, looking at channel strategy, digital touchpoints, customer experience, and eCommerce.

Designing an equally weighted model: A leader is brought in to better connect technology and customer functions, or to own a digital P&L.

Designing a product-weighted model: An optimized model for pure technology organizations and digital platforms.

Designing a technology-weighted model – the technology
remit expands into traditional chief digital officer territory.

This structure is increasing in popularity due to the elevation of the technology role and the increased importance of
technology to company strategy. The technology leader has an expansive remit covering IT, technology and engineering,
data management and occasionally analytics, product management, and digital. The role is then supported by a marketing
officer who is brand and creative focused, and who may or may not sit on the executive committee. The tech role almost
always sits on the executive committee, reporting to the CEO.

Pros

Technology is housed under one accountable leader

Brings IT and platform technology closer to product development and the customer experience

Reduces friction between digital, product, and technology teams

A strong voice for cultural transformation

Cons

Difficult to find a fully holistic tech leader capable of running IT/tech and digital with a customer focus

Complex to combine internal remit of CIO with external duties of CDO

Customer role limited to branding and creative

The digital transformation is not a goal in and of itself, and it is so much more than
technology. We are transforming our business: We are exploring potential new offers to customers, new ways to bring our offers to customers, and new ways to operate our business. In order to be successful, digital needs to be embedded in every aspect of IKEA.7

Inside IKEA’s Digital Transformation, Harvard Business Review

Designing a consumer-weighted model – the customer remit
expands into traditional chief digital officer territory.

As the least common of the structural archetypes, this structure sees a combined marketing and digital function, or a
holistic omnichannel leader sitting on the executive committee. This role owns all marketing from digital/performance to
brand as well as all go-to-market strategy, customer experience across both digital and physical touchpoints, sales, and
product management. In this archetype, the marketing organization is more centralized with one leader reporting to the
CEO as opposed to having the marketing function distributed across business lines and regions. The technology leader may
have a more expanded remit, but is largely internally focused on covering IT/tech, business services, and/or operations.

Pros

Strong commercial and customer focus

Opportunity to bring in highly customer-centric talent to support the customer strategy

Well placed to build a direct-to-consumer offering

Cons

Customer leader reliant on technology function

Technology is often buried in the organizational structure

Designing an equally-weighted model – the leader is brought in to
better connect technology and customer functions, or to own a
digital P&L.

This structure allows for deeper expertise of each area but has the downside of splitting accountability at the executive
level. Most commonly, the technology leader will own IT & technology, engineering teams, and in telecoms, sometimes
network infrastructure. The “middle” leader – often a chief digital or product officer – will focus on customer-facing
technology and digital products / digital touchpoints. The marketing leader then acts as a brand and channel leader.
Typically two of the three roles sit on the executive committee. The technology leader may report into a COO or CFO, given
its smaller remit, although this is becoming less common. Russell Reynolds analysis showed that in 2020, approximately
40-45% of all FTSE or Fortune 500 technology officer leaders sit on the executive committee. In the last 18 months, this
percentage has doubled to 85%, highlighting the elevation of the role.

Pros

Increases depth of expertise in both technology and customer functions

Strong representation of technology, digital, and customer on the leadership team

Dramatically increases the talent pool and the number of opportunities to promote or hire inclusive talent

Cons

Multiple accountable leaders likely with overlapping remits

Lack of coordination and no single voice and vision for tech/digital in the organization

Prone to cause tension between teams, leading to misalignment

Designing a product-weighted model: An optimized model for
pure technology organizations and digital platforms.

Pure technology organizations and digital platforms have adopted a model in which the development and management of
the digital product is split between a technology officer and a product officer. The combination typically consists of 1) an
engineering-focused chief technology officer with the remit to build platforms and products, 2) a chief product officer to
handle product management, strategy, design, roadmaps, and customer experience, and 3) a brand and creative orientated
chief marketing officer. The CTO and CPO are almost always on the executive committee. In larger organizations, the CTO
is often supported by an internally focused engineering leader (vice president) on the senior leadership team. Sixty-five
percent of the technology sector’s customer appointments last year were CMOs or chief revenue officers – suggesting that
these are more growth enabling mandates than customer experience, which would likely be held in the product remit.

Pros

Allows for specialist product talent with industry knowledge (while the technology lead can be an engineering athlete)

Allows the product leader to focus on more user-oriented tech (e.g. design and UX)

Cons

Roles need designing to minimize overlapping remits

Can create tension between product and technology if they are not equal seniority

Customer role may be limited to marketing

The spectrum of talent considerations

As the right structural model is being identified and built out, talent archetypes also need to be taken into consideration.
It is important to crystallize which roles are needed and what the scope of each role is (see Figure 2). Traditional
technology roles encompass data and analytics, data management, cyber security, and/or software engineering; emerging
customer activation roles spearhead brand awareness, storytelling, and marketing platforms and operations. New areas
include product design and strategy, customer analytics, user experience/interface, ventures, and/or P&L management –
these competencies can be shifted to the left or right to fall under the chief technology officer, chief product officer, chief
market officer, or a new role, depending on the business model, organizational design, and reporting lines.

Figure 2. Talent competencies along the technology-customer activation spectrum

There is no one-size-fits-all solution; organizations need to be intentional and thoughtful around what capabilities to
prioritize, and what type of leader brings the right skill set and comfort with change management. Russell Reynolds
has identified considerations to prioritize as organizations navigate this process (see Figure 3). Organizations should
understand the unique impact of each role and the spectrum of core expertise that falls under each position. This
knowledge allows the organization to engage in informed discussions, not only internally with key stakeholders, but also
externally in the market with candidates.

Figure 3. Identifying the right tech-enabled go-to-market leader

To respond to sophisticated customer needs, integrating technology and customer activation functions is an imperative;
the question is no longer if and when, but how. It is important to strategically and intentionally discern what the right
balance of power is, between technology, consumer, digital, and product, in order to drive meaningful growth and
innovation. Organizations can advance their go-to-market platforms by customizing a core structural archetype to business
models and growth strategies and focusing on the most relevant section of the technology-customer activation talent
spectrum.

Authors

George Head is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Sector.  He is based in London.
Katelyn Schoenholtz is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer knowledge team. She is based in New York.

Sources
1, 2 Products and Platforms: Is Your Technology Operating Model Ready? Frazier, Ross, Naufal Khan, Gautam Lunawat, Amit Rahul. McKinsey Digital, February 28, 2020.
3, 5 Organizing for the Future: Nine Keys to Becoming a Future-ready Company. De Smet, Aaron, Chris Gagnon, Elizabeth Mygatt. McKinsey & Company, January 2021.
4 Beyond Matrix Organization, the Helix Organization. De Smet, Aaron, Sarah Kleinman, Kirsten Weerda. McKinsey & Company, October 3, 2019.
6 The Pandemic has Created New Opportunities for Customer-Centric Leaders. Russell Reynolds Associates.
7 Inside IKEA’s Digital Transformation. Stackpole, Thomas. Harvard Business Review, June 4, 2021.

Aligning Technology and Customer Functions in the Post-Pandemic Paradigm

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business