Sustainability: Genuine Commitment and Explicit Net Zero Targets | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Sustainability: Genuine Commitment and Explicit Net Zero Targets

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

+ 3 authors

April 29, 2022

8 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

The 2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study explore multiple aspects of director and leadership behaviors and board agendas.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Rich Fields

Boston

Laura Sanderson

London

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

Kurt Harrison

New York

Sarah Galloway

London

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

RRA 2022 GLOBAL BOARD CULTURE AND DIRECTORS BEHAVIORS STUDY

Download the PDF version

Every three years, Russell Reynolds Associates surveys a global group of board directors, asking them about their board, their fellow directors, how they spend their time, and what topics they focus on the most. This year, over 1,100 directors participated. Russell Reynolds uses the information they provide us in our work assessing directors, recruiting and evaluating board leaders, and as part of our board effectiveness and advisory work.

The 2022 survey data was particularly rich, and Russell Reynolds Associates will be publishing a series of reports throughout this year looking at high performing director and board leader behaviors, the attributes of high performing boards, sustainability, and other topics. This series will help directors around the world understand the latest trends and insights in each of these areas, and learn what they can do to enhance their own board performance and effectiveness.

As pressure mounts from stakeholders, sustainability has never been a bigger focus for boards.

Investors, lawmakers, regulators, employees, and customers are all focused on sustainability, and often wonder if the board is doing enough to set up the company for long-term success in an increasingly sustainability-minded environment. Around the world – from regulators in Europe to the Securities and Exchange Commission in the US – governments are actively considering new standards for consistent disclosure on sustainability related topics. Our research shows that 73% of boards are discussing sustainability strategy at least once per year, and 65% of directors say their board is making a genuine commitment to sustainability.

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. “How often does your full board review…” N=956. 2022.

How would you characterize your board's attitude towards environmental sustainability?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. “How would you characterize your board’s attitude toward environmental sustainability?” N=951. 2022.

This commitment is critical to meeting evolving sustainability disclosure and performance requirements, whether set by investors, regulatory bodies, or others. Of particular focus is commitment to Net Zero targets, the goal established by the Paris Agreement to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius compared to pre-industrial levels.  More than two-thirds of boards – 68%– have not set a Net Zero target date, and only 27% have set targets that they believe their companies will achieve. While that may seem concerning, it is important to note that only 5% of directors explicitly said they did not think their company will reach its Net Zero target dates; 20% will likely set their targets in the next six months, and another 35% anticipate doing so at some future date.

Has your board set a Net Zero target date yet?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. “Has your board set a Net Zero target date yet?” N=962. 2022.

In recent years, investors have been clear that sustainability and climate risk is the responsibility of the full board.  Rather than having a sole “ESG director” or “sustainability director,” expectations are increasing for the entire board to bring a minimum level of sustainability awareness – if not expertise – to their work, using it to identify both risks and new opportunities for value creation. In our survey, directors reported feeling confident that their board collectively has sufficient expertise to address the sustainability issues facing their businesses.

What percentage of the directors on your board have the skills and experiences necessary to address the sustainability issues facing your business?

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. “What percentage of the directors on your board have the skills and experiences necessary to address the sustainability issues facing your business?” N=949. 2022.

While 58% of directors in our survey said that a majority of the directors on their board have the necessary skills and experiences to address sustainability, it is unclear if that is perception or reality. Corporate governance analysts have reported a lower-than-desired level of directors with sustainability qualifications or relevant experience on major boards today. But, to the extent that skill or capability gap exists, it may be closing:  Our recent research with nominations and governance committee chairs found that 63% say sustainability is now a critical leadership competency for prospective directors, and the majority surveyed said that the competency is more important now than ever before.

It’s clear that boards have work to do to build confidence among their management teams, investors, and other stakeholders as to their ability to effectively manage sustainability. What is less clear is whether this requires directors to personally possess technical sustainability expertise, or whether effective management can be enabled by the board’s reliance on outside expert advice when needed. As the sustainability leaders and laggards of each industry become increasingly easier to identify, the market will likely provide a useful measurement for the importance of sustainability credentialing for the board.

From Insights to Action

In our study on The Board’s Role in Sustainable Leadership, we identified actions for boards to take in order to strengthen their engagement with and oversight of corporate sustainability activities, including:

Proactively engage with external stakeholders about sustainability to ensure you understand their priorities and concerns

Embed sustainability into all discussions with the CEO and executive team

Establish a purpose-driven culture at all levels that looks at issues through a sustainability lens

Educate directors on sustainability

Apply a sustainability lens to corporate strategy decision-making

Identify key material factors based on the business, setting goals and establishing clear metrics for tracking progress toward them

Structure the board to engage meaningfully on sustainability

Change compensation models to account for sustainability targets

Prioritize a sustainability mindset when hiring directors

Prioritize a sustainability mindset when hiring CEOs

As investors and stakeholders continue to advocate for sustainability efforts, and as expectations grow for corporations to play a central role in making the world a better place, board leaders must find ways to enable and drive sustainability in the corporation. By engaging thoughtfully around these 10 actions – which relate to the issues of board leadership; board culture; purpose, strategy, and risk alignment; structure and process; and people and composition – board leaders can ensure that their company “does well by doing good.”

Methodology

Over 1,100 supervisory board-level directors from more than 41 countries participated in the Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey, with 55 percent of respondents based in Europe, 27 percent in the Americas, 12 percent in Oceana, 3 percent in Asia, 2 percent in Africa, and 1 percent in the Middle East. Industries represented included financial services (26 percent of respondents), industrial and natural resources (22 percent), consumer (11 percent), technology (11 percent), healthcare (10 percent), and professional and business services (6 percent). Forty-four percent of respondents’ companies had annual revenue over $1 billion.

Download the PDF version

Authors

Rusty O’Kelley co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas.  He is based in Stamford.
Rich Fields leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board Effectiveness practice.  He is based in Boston.
Laura Sanderson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe.  She is based in London.
Clarke Murphy is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners.  He is based in New York.
Kurt Harrison co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice.  He is based in New York City.
Sarah Galloway co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice.  She is based in London.
Molly Smith is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners.  She is based in Boston.
Elena Loridas is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners Knowledge Management team. She is based in Chicago.

2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study

Explore full paper series

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices