Retail’s Return to Work Post COVID-19 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Retail’s Return to Work Post COVID-19

Culture RiskConsumer

Article

Caitlin MacNamara

May 25, 2022

8 min

Culture RiskConsumer

Executive Summary

In the flexible work debate, retail leadership is adapting to account for the last two years, linking their strategy to culture and business objectives.

Close

Caitlin MacNamara

Toronto
New York

Two years ago, “working from home” was a stigmatized statement. Being in the office was thought to be critical to productivity, culture, and development.1 Companies fought for prime office space in major urban centers and worked tirelessly to increase collaboration through open-office designs and communal spaces. However, the COVID-19 pandemic changed our way of life in a way that no one could have predicted. With shelter-in-place orders put into action, organizations were forced to act fast and completely change the way they operate. Retailers, specifically, grappled with how they could support both their remote corporate employees without alienating their front-line workers who did not have the option to work remotely. Now, two years later, business leaders are more convinced about the productivity gains of this monumental shift to work-from-home in the corporate suite, but many are not giving up on the office.

As organizations seek to adapt to the changing work landscape, many have adopted new models for their corporate employees. Across our ongoing conversations with leaders across the c-suite, we spoke in depth with four Chief Human Resources Officers at publicly traded retailers ranging in size from regional players to national and global brands, to better understand the spectrum across which organizations are implementing these new models.

At the most basic level, retailers are choosing among three primary options for returning to the workplace: calling everyone back to the office, developing a hybrid model, or implementing a fully remote working structure. However, there are many nuances these three categories don’t address. Throughout our conversations, RRA learned that hybrid and flexibility mean different things to different people. One HR leader told us they are going fully remote and have begun piloting and leveraging AI/VR technologies. Some have developed a framework based on the needs of different categories of roles, giving autonomy to managers and using travel to convene on a specified basis. Others have created satellite offices across the country, requiring visits to headquarters on a specific and intentional cadence. Lastly, some are establishing “hard hybrid” guidelines, dictating specific “in office” days for specific teams. As organizations seek to navigate the changing tides of the pandemic, figuring out the right working model is top of mind for executive teams and boards.

How does leadership feel?

At the start of the pandemic, more junior level employees relished in the flexibility of “working from anywhere,” while the more senior leadership struggled both with managing their teams’ newfound autonomy while also adapting to their own leadership style. To many in the c-suite, CEOs, and board members, being in the office was an integral part of their career development. These leaders grew up in organizations that valued arriving early and leaving late as the picture of dedication and hard work.

“Those who are most resistant (to the work-from-home model) may be the most distant from the action.”

CEOs did not expect to change the way they lead, which ultimately led many to wrestle with their longstanding beliefs regarding “how to work.” There has been a lot of discussion about generational views of work and how many CEOs and other top leaders have had to wrestle with their belief that to be effective you have to be “present” and in-person. This was articulately reflected by one HR leader who said those who are most resistant tend be the most distant from the action.  In other instances, CEOs were pushed to be more strategic and less hands-on, given the physical distance from their teams. Instead of spending time in the office going from one tactical meeting to another, one CEO noted that he had more time to take external meetings, meet with stakeholders, and holistically think about the business and its growth from a more strategic vantage point.

To further understand how the c-suite was feeling, we spoke to approximately 50 CEOs across the globe and found that while some struggled with this new balance others have found silver linings from a quality of a life perspective. One example of a more traditional CEO at a $2B specialty retailer, who firmly believed being in the office was the crucial for the business, ended up relocating to a more temperate climate for the winter months. However, after experiencing working from this new place while also maintaining productivity and increasing quality of life, this CEO’s perspective changed, realizing that working elsewhere did not mean working less effectively.  Research from consulting firm PwC found that fewer than 1 in 5 executives want to return to the shared workplace as it was before the pandemic.2

As the pandemic has continued, Cushman & Wakefield reported that 70% of millennial and generation ‘X’ workers have struggled with the challenges of working from home, as work environment in small apartments, shared spaces, or even while working from their parents’ homes has proved difficult and exhausting.3 These employees are ready to return to the office – albeit with a less rigid schedule. This change in attitude has required CEOs to lead through uncertainty. Unable to mimic the environment they grew up (in person and in office) CEOs have learned to lead in new ways, ultimately focusing more on outcomes than process.

Linking strategy to your culture and business objectives:

How and when companies bring back their employees will have long-standing implications for their culture. Table stakes are high, especially when firm lines are drawn in the sand. Insisting that employees return to the office creates the risk of losing talent, while enabling remote working options makes maintaining a consistent culture much more difficult. There is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ solution, as an organization’s strategic priorities and cultural norms will ultimately dictate the direction and speed of change. However, organizations that have embraced an intentional in-person approach with a ‘test-and-learn’ mindset have proven to be more agile throughout this iterative process.

The model that organizations choose cannot only be a decision based on the executive team’s opinions. Like any other business strategy, it needs to be intrinsically linked to the fabric of the organization. In speaking to several retail brands, the ones that seemed to have had the smoothest transition to this new paradigm were the ones that articulated and linked their approach to their overall guiding principles of culture.

One HR leader began the process of pandemic policy development by first re-stating the company’s well-known mission and values. In turn, their COVID response protocols were tied specifically back to these guiding principles. This ensured clear alignment and consistency across the organization, while re-enforcing the culture they had worked carefully to build over the years.

Another CHRO used the pandemic as a catalyst to help transform their more traditional, legacy-minded corporate culture into a more agile and entrepreneurial mindset. Before COVID, few had laptops or leveraged Webex or Zoom. In-person and in-office interactions were essential and central to the way the company operated and given their geographic location, also hindered the access to talent. COVID-19 required the organization to quickly change norms. Investing in technology capabilities and opening up locations for talent to work remotely also lowered barriers to accessing more diverse and highly qualified talent pools.

Navigating global complexities and access to talent

As retailers navigate how to be supportive of their employees that are on the front-lines while developing a separate, yet inclusive hybrid policy for their corporate employees – it is clear that remote work is not just something you can tack on but something that needs to be intentionally implemented.

Furthermore, it is well recognized that the talent market is incredibly tight at the moment. It is a seller’s market for high-caliber candidates, especially those with in-demand functional experience. Many of these talented leaders are resistant to relocating at the present time, given the uncertainty of the past two years. Companies and leaders who continue to be intentional in the demands they make of their teams, recognizing the difference between when presence is needed versus when someone is merely present, will have better access to the best talent. Recognizing that the needs and desires of employees have shifted and working to build policies, approaches, and protocols around these new priorities will enable organizations to attract and retain the best talent.

Conclusion

It has been over two years since the start of the pandemic and organizations have been through many iterations of working models. No one organization would state that they have designed a permanent solution. Some have benefited from better access to talent, others struggle with how to be flexible around flexibility. There are two key points that leaders should keep in mind: 1) norms are still evolving and organizations should keep innovating their approach, and 2) employees lives and attitudes towards work have changed substantially.

To be successful in the war on talent, leaders should lead with empathy and embrace a test-and-learn approach across technology and tools, development and learning, on-boarding and mentoring, and building culture. Organizations that embraced this early in the pandemic are now spending their time innovating and iterating, instead of setting (and re-setting) new dates for the return to the office.

Authors

Caitlin MacNamara leads Russell Reynolds Associates' Americas Retail practice. She splits her time between Toronto and New York.
Katelyn Schoenholtz is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates' Consumer Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

Sources

Reimagining the office and work life after COVID-19, McKinsey & Company, June 2020
The future of work after COVID-19, McKinsey & Company, February 2021
After COVID-19, work will never be ‘normal’ again, Berkely News, March 2021

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices