How to Develop Sustainable Leadership Acumen | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How to Develop Sustainable Leadership Acumen

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

Article

May 18, 2022

9 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipIndustry TrendsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSustainability Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The sustainability agenda is here to stay. We set the skills leaders will need to help their organizations become more sustainable.

Close

To future-proof your business, it is vital to grow and develop sustainability-competent leaders who understand how and why sustainability issues are salient to long-term business success. These leaders need to not only understand the shifting structural dynamic of their industry, but also of global markets.

While organizations are increasingly vocal about their sustainability credentials and plans, there is a marked difference between brand management and real value creation or harm reduction. Unfortunately, 45% of C-suite leaders admit that the driving force behind their company’s sustainability strategy is brand management, and only one in five say it is firmly rooted in real value creation. This underscores the importance of enabling and developing next-generation leaders to push the sustainability agenda forward. These leaders will be key to ensuring that their organizations maintain focus, especially when economic headwinds begin to blow, and make sustainability core to business strategy and operations.

Sustainable leaders–individuals that effectively integrate sustainability into organizational strategy and operations–combine a sustainable mindset with a differentiated set of capabilities that have enabled them to drive the transformation needed to achieve sustainability and commercial outcomes [Figure 1].

Figure 1: The RRA Model of the Sustainable Leader

For organizations to make progress on sustainability and ensure that it becomes a true organizational competency, they must invest in the development of their next-generation leaders. The Sustainable Leader model defines the skills and behaviors required to establish this competency, and this article explores how to develop those skills. When comparing the educational and career experiences of sustainable leaders  to a group of CEOs from Global Fortune 500 companies that perform poorly on sustainability metrics, we found that  sustainable leaders have more international and cross-functional experience.

They were substantially more likely to have studied abroad (36%) than their counterparts (4%) and were also substantially more likely to have worked on two or more continents (45% vs 16%). Furthermore, they were more than twice as likely to have significant career experience in two or more functions overall (64% vs 30%), and notably more likely to have worked in operations and supply chain (55% vs 32%).

Figure 2: Experience of sustainable leaders compared to unsustainable leaders

While it is hard to infer causality, it would be reasonable to assume that sustainable leaders have benefitted from their exposure to multiple cultures and a more well-rounded understanding of how business works. Indeed, many of the sustainable leaders we spoke to as part of our research, Leadership for the Decade of Action, made precisely this point as they discussed their own experiences.

Organizations should  consider the following leadership development actions:

Identify opportunities to embed discussion about sustainability into the core leadership development curriculum. This should not simply be added as a separate module but woven throughout other modules like those on people leadership, strategy, or innovation.

Ensure leadership development programs give leaders exposure to a range of stakeholders, especially those that are likely to have substantially different worldviews and life experiences.

Identify relevant experiences (roles or projects) that will foster a sustainable mindset and help leaders hone the critical competencies of multi-level systems thinking, stakeholder inclusion, and long-term activation.

To help successfully take these actions, below we provide guidance on understanding what sustainability looks like in practice, and how to identify or create development opportunities that will help build sustainable leadership acumen.

Understanding what sustainability looks like in practice

Sustainability encompasses both social and environmental outcomes – everything from human rights, worker conditions, and reducing economic, gender, and racial inequality, to reducing or reversing the effects of pollution, deforestation, and climate change. Given the role business plays in society and the impact it has on people and the planet, sustainability is not something to be managed as a side project; it is core to how businesses need to be run. This means that there are a large array of responsibilities and experiences that next-generation leaders can benefit from in their journey to become sustainable leaders. These responsibilities and experiences can be categorized as those related to people, products, processes, partners, and profits [Figure 3].

Figure 3: Five Ps Framework

What does embedded sustainability actually look like?

People

Product

Process

Partners

Profits

Skillsets, organization structures, and leadership culture
Creating new products or services or redesigning existing ones
Reconfiguring operational practices and processes
Relationships with suppliers, clients, and other collaborators
Capital allocation, investment decisions and corporate strategy

Building diverse and inclusive teams

Holding leaders accountable to diversity outcomes

Considering sustainability acumen and mindset when hiring and promoting leaders

Holding leaders accountable to sustainability metrics

Innovating to produce more sustainable products or services that help improve customers’ sustainability

Reconfiguring existing product design, packaging or distribution to reduce waste

Using sustainability lens to identify new customers or markets

Minimizing emissions and waste from value chain

Embedding sustainability metrics into product/service design and roll-out scorecards

Applying a sustainability lens to processes for identifying risks and opportunities

Redesigning processes for gathering employee and other stakeholder input

Working with sustainable suppliers and holding them accountable for sustainable practices

Establishing mutual benefit partnerships and JVs with civil society and academia

Cross industry partnerships to drive change across ecosystems

Embedding sustainability lens in allocation of capital business investments, and long-term strategy development

Using longer-term time horizons for decision-making, including consideration of lifetime costs for both CapEx and OpEx

Investing in research and development in support of sustainability strategy

Facilitating development opportunities

The 5 Ps Framework provides a helpful guide for assessing the level of experience that next-generation leaders may have already had. Our research finds that 40% of next-generation leaders have had exposure to three or more job responsibilities with a connection to improving environmental or social outcomes.

The framework also acts as a good guide for designing “crucible” experiences that will stretch and develop your leaders. International or functional rotations that form the backbone of many experiential leadership development programs are natural starting points and should be supplemented with bolder opportunities, like rotating into a supplier or customer’s organization or taking ownership of a product development opportunity [Figure 4].

Figure 4: Crucible experiences and how to amplify sustainable leadership lessons

5 Ps Connection

Development Opportunity

People Partners

Work in another function or line of business

Why it matters: This provides a different perspective on how the business operates and, if designed well, should also increase the leader’s exposure to different stakeholder groups.

How to make it work :

Ensure the function or line of business is notably different from the leader’s existing area.

Pick areas that are either more advanced on sustainability or set clear sustainability objectives for the leader as they take on the role.

Include objectives around building relationships and building diverse teams.

People Product Process Partners Profits

International experience

Why it matters: Such experience is powerful for providing a different frame of reference for the leader. The dynamics affecting a business – not least what stakeholders expect – are often varied between regions. As such, this helps the leader understand and question the assumptions held in their home region. Moreover, international experience provides exposure to other leaders that have different cultural backgrounds and associated ways of thinking through problems and opportunities.

How to make it work :

Ensure the region the leader moves to is significantly different from their home region (e.g., a European leader moving to Southeast Asia or Africa).

Make sure they are not positioned as the “ex-pat” coming in to teach the locals lessons from their region, but as someone coming in to learn from and collaborate with others.

People Partners

Rotation to a supplier, customer, or other partner

Why it matters: Businesses sit within and are reliant on their eco-system. Collaboration with theorganizations around them is critical for success. Secondments to other organizations are a powerful way to help a leader gain a better understanding of a new ecosystem, build out their professional network, and expose them to diverse ways of working and thinking. Additionally, such opportunities are often fertile grounds for innovation.

How to make it work :

Select partners that are critical to future strategy and that will provide a very different vantage point.

Choose partners with a strong lens on sustainability.

People Process Profits

Turning around an underperforming business

Why it matters: Much more so than simply taking on a “steady state” business, taking on an underperforming business creates a need (and license) to analyze the business from multiple angles. This creates a natural platform to cast the net wide in terms of engaging with a range of stakeholders and will challenge the leader to question their assumptions about the drivers of business performance.

How to make it work :

Make sustainability a core part of the turnaround objective, i.e., success should not simply be getting the business back to profit.

Product Process Profits

Investing in research and development in support of sustainability strategy

Why it matters: Centering sustainability strategy in the business ensures progress is consistently made towards strategic goals. Creating a dedicated R&D role or team with a focus on sustainability holds senior leaders accountable for meeting goals and keeps innovation at the forefront of strategic decision-making.

How to make it work :

Create specific KPIs to measure team/department/initiative progress, embrace innovative approaches, and communicate on status often. Use this engine to drive sustainability strategy forward if momentum wanes.

Product Profits

Designing and/or launching a new product or service line

Why it matters: Building something from scratch allows a leader to understand all the puzzle pieces and decide how best to put them together. This provides a natural opportunity to bring a sustainability lens to their work.

How to make it work :

Make sustainability a core part of how success of the new product or service line is measured.

Turning this framework into action

The recommendations in the table above are tried and tested leadership development mechanisms. The strategies offered are no different from leadership development strategies; it is the focus and intent that makes them effective in furthering sustainability strategy and leadership development. These recommendations are not aimed at issue-based leadership development, but meant to help next-generation leaders be more effective in their broader ecosystem.

However, these recommendations are only as strong as their application. Interacting with suppliers and other stakeholders who have a strong lens into sustainability strategy is a good step, but it only works effectively if translated to the rotating executive. It is important to keep sustainability at the forefront of the day-to-day while enacting these recommendations. Having clear sustainability KPIs can help leaders have a roadmap for success when it comes to sustainability strategy.

These recommendations are intended to promote new experiences, encourage empathy and openness, and expand leaders’ perspectives on sustainability, resulting in more holistic leadership that values both organizational and environment health.

Further Reading

Sustainable Leadership: Talent requirements for sustainable enterprises

How to Become a Sustainable Leader

Assessing and Selecting Sustainable Leaders

Divides and Dividends

Leadership for the Decade of Action

Authors

Tom Handcock leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in London.

Beth Hawley is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Chicago.

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Social Impact and Sustainability practices. She is based in Portland.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices