Creating Value: How Private Equity- backed Portfolio Companies Can Move the Needle on Sustainability | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Creating Value: How Private Equity- Backed Portfolio Companies Can Move the Needle on Sustainability

Sustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesPortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalSustainability OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

Article

September 03, 2021

3 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesPortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalSustainability OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Sustainability commitments at the private equity firm level are not translating into portfolio company businesses.

Close

Mark Adams

Boston

Emily Taylor

New York
London

Private equity firms are making highly visible commitments to address the challenge of sustainability. Market-leading firms, such as The Carlyle Group, EQT, and TPG Capital, now produce sustainability reports and have dedicated executives overseeing sustainability initiatives and embedding sustainability throughout the deal cycle. Other firms are even making debt funding contingent on hitting certain ESG targets.1 This comes in  response  to  pressure  from society at large, but also from fund investors – 88% of limited partners use ESG performance indicators when making investment decisions, according to recent research by Bain & Company.2

Despite these public commitments, PE-backed portfolio companies do not appear to be making consistent progress toward sustainability goals. According to the Russell Reynolds Associates 2021 Global Leadership Monitor (GLM), which surveyed nearly 200 portfolio company CEOs, C-suite leaders and next- generation executives, only 44% believe that their executive leadership teams are effectively embracing opportunities for ESG, compared to 67% of public company executives. This suggests that good intentions are not yet translating into action for portfolio companies.

Do you agree that your organization's executive leadership team effectively embraces opportunities for ESG?

44% of portfolio company executives agree or strongly agree

67% of public company executives agree or strongly agree

Source: Russell Reynolds  Associates,  2021 Global Leadership Monitor, base n = 195 private equity-backed portfolio leaders

Private equity-backed portfolio companies are not prioritizing sustainability in key operational decisions

A first step to integrating sustainability into a business is often redesigning business models, core processes, and/or products to embed ESG and corporate social responsibility considerations. Done well, this feeds a strategic transformation that can impact customer loyalty and employee satisfaction, leading to better brand reputation and increase in market share, and eventually to higher value creation and higher deal multiples.3 However, GLM data suggests few portfolio company leaders are actively engaged in such activities. Only about 25% have been involved in redesigning processes, products or services with the explicit objective of improving environmental or social outcomes over the past two years.4 Even fewer – about 20% – are currently involved in internal efforts to examine the organization’s environmental or social impact.

One reason few portfolio company leaders are championing sustainability may be the lack of financial incentives. Organizations communicate their priorities, such as profit and revenue, client service, and market expansion, by including them in bonus targets. Compensation strategies that encompass ESG goals are nearly non-existent at portfolio companies, with only 5% of portfolio executives reporting that they are a consideration.5 (To be fair, they are also nascent at public companies; just 12% of public company executives have their compensation linked to sustainability goals with compensation).

An additional issue is the need to  embed  sustainability  competencies  into talent considerations. Sustainability  initiatives  and  dedicated  funds  cannot truly advance if leaders are not genuinely committed to the cause. This is still a rare practice at portfolio companies, with just 9% of executives reporting that sustainability experience is considered a core hiring criterion.6

How PE-backed portfolio company leaders are integrating sustainability into business and talent considerations

20% are involved in internal efforts to examine the organization's environmental or social impact

9% embed sustainability competencies into talent decisions

5% have compensation linked to meeting ESG goals

Source: Russell Reynolds  Associates,  2021 Global Leadership Monitor, base n = 195 private equity-backed portfolio leaders

Call to action for portfolio companies: Prioritize sustainability in talent considerations

To ensure that PE firm sustainability commitments translate into portfolio company action, PE investors will want to incentivize portfolio company leaders to reconsider how and why they are running their businesses. Most importantly, however, portfolio companies need to hire leaders who can champion sustainability. This does not necessarily mean hiring leaders who bring a wealth of sustainability experience; rather, it is about assessing leaders on whether or not they bring the right orientation and mindset.

What defines a sustainability orientation and mindset? Russell Reynolds partnered  with  the  United  Nations  Global Compact to conduct a study focused on understanding differentiating characteristics of sustainability pioneers. The study interviewed 55 global chief executive officers and board directors with a demonstrated track record of driving change by integrating sustainability into business strategy and analyzed each leader’s background and career history. This data was compared with data from 50 chief executive officers from global Fortune 500 organizations with poor sustainability rankings. The study showed that sustainability pioneers demonstrate specific, critical leadership attributes that are driven by a sustainable mindset.

Leaders with a sustainable mindset base their leadership on the belief that business is inherently connected to the wider societal and environmental context in which it operates. Sustainable leaders demonstrate the following four critical leadership attributes that are driven by a sustainable mindset.7

To address increasingly complex business challenges, particularly those stemming from the evolving pandemic, portfolio companies need to be led by curious, results-driven leaders with high levels of ambition.

Sustainable leaders possess high levels of empathy and authenticity to build collaborative relationships with diverse stakeholders ranging from limited partners to employees to external communities.

Sustainable leaders possess the courage to challenge traditional approaches.

Sustainable leaders understand that sustainability is not achieved overnight. These leaders set audacious goals and are resilient and courageous in staying the course.

Source: UN Global Compact-Russell Reynolds Associates, Leadership for the Decade of Action, 2020

Investing responsibly and being accountable to societal and environmental consequences are integral to PE firm’s reputations, as well as the brands and reputations of their portfolio companies. With sustainable leaders driving change, portfolio companies will create meaningful value for its customers, employees, business, and ultimately investors.

Additional Authors

Alix Stuart is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Boston.
Joy Tan is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in New York City.

References

1. Private equity vows to help the world. Lenders want proof. Bahceli, Yoruk, Simon Jessop. Reuters, June 9, 2021.
2,3. The Expanding Case for ESG in Private Equity. Seemann, Azel, Dale Hardcastle, Deike Diers, Jacqueline Han. Bain & Company, March 1, 2021.
4,5,6. 2021 Global Leadership Monitor: Leadership Preparedness for the Road Ahead. Crookes, Jemi, Tom Handcock, PJ Neal, Alix Stuart. Russell Reynolds Associates, May 4, 2021.
7. Leadership for the Decade of Action: A Study on the Characteristics of Sustainable Business Leaders. United Nations Global Company, Russell Reynolds Associates, July 9, 2020.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices