Director Performance: The High Impact Behaviors of the Most Effective Directors | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Director Performance: The High Impact Behaviors of the Most Effective Directors

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

+ 3 authors

April 29, 2022

7 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

The 2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study explore multiple aspects of director and leadership behaviors and board agendas.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Rich Fields

Boston

Laura Sanderson

London

Justus O’Brien

Stamford

Margot McShane

San Francisco

Grace Cheng

Beijing

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

RRA 2022 GLOBAL BOARD CULTURE AND DIRECTORS BEHAVIORS STUDY

Download the PDF version

Every three years, Russell Reynolds Associates surveys a global group of board directors, asking them about their board, their fellow directors, how they spend their time, and what topics they focus on the most. This year, over 1,100 directors participated. Russell Reynolds uses the information they provide us in our work assessing directors, recruiting and evaluating board leaders, and as part of our board effectiveness and advisory work.

The 2022 survey data was particularly rich, and Russell Reynolds Associates will be publishing a series of reports throughout this year looking at high performing director and board leader behaviors, the attributes of high performing boards, sustainability, and other topics. This series will help directors around the world understand the latest trends and insights in each of these areas, and learn what they can do to enhance their own board performance and effectiveness.

As Peter Drucker said, “culture eats strategy for lunch.” This is true in the best boardrooms as well.

Three years ago, we identified a group we call Gold Medal Boards; those where directors rate their board’s effectiveness highly (9 or 10 on a 1–10-point scale) and where the company has outperformed relevant TSR benchmarks for at least the last two consecutive years. If you were to step into a Gold Medal Boardroom, you would quickly notice a difference in the way directors behave, conduct themselves, and go about their work.

In fact, on every single one of the 28 measures of culture and behavior we reviewed, Gold Medal Board directors outperform their peers – sometimes by significant levels. Let’s take a look:

Director Communication

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Percentage of directors saying they “always” or “often” observed directors demonstrating the specific behavior. N=1,136. 2022.

Gold Medal Board directors are more likely to communicate and engage with others in a constructive manner, go out of their way to understand differences and perspectives, and ask the right questions to keep the discussion focused on what matters most.

Director Engagement

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Percentage of directors saying they “always” or “often” observed directors demonstrating the specific behavior. N=1,120. 2022.

As a baseline, Gold Medal Board directors show up prepared, they focus and pay attention in meetings, and engage on topics that are important to the board, even if they aren’t directly related to directors’ executive experience.

Director Relationship Building

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Percentage of directors saying they “always” or “often” observed directors demonstrating the specific behavior. N=1,105. 2022.

Gold Medal Board directors know that relationships matter, and they go out of their way to build and sustain critical relationships with their peers, the CEO, and other key executives. While engagement with investors ranks lower, that’s appropriately so, as not all directors should be engaging with the market.

Director Perspective

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Percentage of directors saying they “always” or “often” observed directors demonstrating the specific behavior. N=701. 2022.

While all directors approach their board service with a desire to enable the success of the board and the company, Gold Medal Board directors invest more heavily in doing so. They demonstrate sound business judgment, keep the conversation focused, and build an inclusive culture. They are also more likely to use a longer timeframe for decision making, helping the board avoid a short-term orientation.

Director Character

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey. Percentage of directors saying they “always” or “often” observed directors demonstrating the specific behavior. N=1,080. 2022.

Character behaviors are about integrity, courage, and trust, and how they manifest themselves in the boardroom. While almost everyone acts with integrity, Gold Medal Board directors are far more likely to demonstrate courage and build trust – two critical enablers of boardroom excellence.

From Insights to Action

Almost all boards aspire to be high performing – but few actually measure potential and current directors to assess their ability to create a high performing board.

Russell Reynolds Associates helps place over 1000 corporate directors each year and this work, combined with our board effectiveness consulting, gives us a unique view into hundreds of public and private companies, as well as nonprofit organizations. In addition, the data from our research efforts enables us to identify the attributes of high performing directors. We divide these into two groups of characteristics.

Foundational or Baseline Attributes: those required to be an effective director and fulfill the responsibilities of the role well

High Performing Attributes: those that we see among the best directors, and that help set them apart from the rest

While many attributes are important, some stand out as being critical enablers of director success:

Foundational or baseline behaviors of effective directors:

Prepared and engaged: Comes prepared, is fully present at meetings, avoids distractions and seeks to add value across a range of board topics.

Current and open: Stays abreast of industry and company developments, is open to new ideas, processes, and ways to solve problems.

Builds trust and respect: Assumes positive intent and builds the trust and respect of fellow directors and management.

Knows their role: Understands the role of a director and avoids crossing the line into management.

Stakeholder and investor savvy: Effectively understands institutional investor and other key stakeholder concerns and how to think about maximizing shareholder returns.

High performing director attributes:

Sound judgment and relevant expertise: Applies the relevant, current business expertise and insights to the situation at hand and demonstrates sound business and situational judgment.

Constructive engagement: Listens more than talks, willing to constructively engage with and challenge management and peers when appropriate.

Integrity and courage: Acts with integrity and possesses the courage to do the right thing for the right reasons.

Focus and questions: Asks the right questions appropriate to the situation and focuses on the key issues relevant to the discussion and business.

Possesses an independent perspective: Avoids groupthink and prioritizes the interests of the company’s shareholders and stakeholders.

To build a highly effective board that successfully adds value to the company in the way strong directors desire to, it is important boards use these insights – tailored as necessary to their unique context – in both the recruitment of directors, and their regular evaluation of director performance.

Methodology

Over 1,100 supervisory board-level directors from more than 41 countries participated in the Russell Reynolds Associates’ 2022 Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Survey, with 55 percent of respondents based in Europe, 27 percent in the Americas, 12 percent in Oceana, 3 percent in Asia, 2 percent in Africa, and 1 percent in the Middle East. Industries represented included financial services (26 percent of respondents), industrial and natural resources (22 percent), consumer (11 percent), technology (11 percent), healthcare (10 percent), and professional and business services (6 percent). Forty-four percent of respondents’ companies had annual revenue over $1 billion.

Download the PDF version

Authors

Rusty O’Kelley co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas.  He is based in Stamford.
Rich Fields leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board Effectiveness practice.  He is based in Boston.
Laura Sanderson co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Europe.  She is based in London.
Justus O’Brien co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners.  He is based in Stamford.
Margot McShane co-leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in the Americas.  She is based in San Francisco.
Beatrice Ballini is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners.  She is based in Milan.
Steve Langton leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners in Asia Pacific.  He is based in Sydney.
Grace Cheng leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ operations in China, is a senior member of the firm’s Board and CEO Advisory Partners.  She is based in Beijing.

2022 RRA Global Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study

Explore full paper series

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices