2021: Year of CFO Turnover & Strides in Gender Diversity | RRA

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

2021: The year of CFO turnover and strides in gender diversity

Inclusive LeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionInclusion and Culture

Article

November 29, 2021

7 min

Inclusive LeadershipSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionInclusion and Culture

Executive summary

Our analysis of the S&P 500 shows higher CFO turnover and more women appointed to top finance roles.

Close

Jenna Fisher

Palo Alto
San Francisco

Jim Lawson

New York

Rose Mistri Somers

New York
Boston

Republished by Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance.

CFO turnover is running high, with 2021 surpassing 2020 and 2019 churn rates, Russell Reynolds Associates’ recent analysis of the
S&P 500 revealed. In 2021, there were 89 CFO transitions in the
S&P 500, bringing CFO turnover to 18% — the highest its been in
the past few years.

This high churn rate is the result of a combination of factors, including a frothy
IPO market that has significantly increased the number of public company CFO
opportunities, as well as overall strong equity performance that puts retirement
in closer reach for some.

At the same time, we see a considerable number of CFOs moving into operational
roles within their current organizations, opening up the top finance spot. As
turnover becomes a more pressing issue, companies will need to be more
intentional than ever about understanding their CFO’s career aspirations and
investing in internal succession planning to get ahead in a competitive talent
market.

Significant turnover in 2021

Coming out of the pandemic, business needs are shifting, contributing to the CFO role continuing to evolve and expand in
almost every organization. Yet some sectors are more affected than others by these trends.

Similar to last year, turnover is especially prevalent in the consumer/retail and industrial sectors. These organizations have
had to pivot dramatically due to Covid-induced issues such as supply chain disruption, and local regulations imposing new
operational restrictions. In the last year, consumer/retail turnover has almost doubled, suggesting the disruptions are far
from over. A slightly brighter picture emerges in the industrial sector, where turnover has decreased year over year.

CFO succession planning is starting to pay off… for some

A clear trend in recent years is that the proportion
of internal CFO appointments continues to rise, with
incumbents bringing a significant amount of experience.
Internally promoted CFOs in 2021 have an average tenure of
12.3 years within their organization before becoming CFO.

For companies that had succession plans in place, the
benefits have started to become clear. However, for
those that need to look externally for a CFO, there is
an increasingly tight market driven by high levels of
activity in private equity, in addition to SPACs. External
appointments also reveal a high level of experience, with
88% of externally-appointed finance chiefs having previous
CFO experience, up from 75% in 2020. In other words,
companies are more likely to prefer a candidate who has
been in the top job already versus a step-up.

Silver lining: gender diversity

While turnover can create stress and uncertainty, one of the benefits that has come with the increase in activity this year
is an influx of gender diversity. Women comprised 32% of new CFO appointments in 2021, almost double last year’s rate.
While the overall percentage of women S&P500 CFOs decreased in 2020, as CFO resignations reached record highs, they
rose year over year, hopefully signaling the start of an upward trend.

Of the newly-appointed women CFOs in 2021, the majority
are first-time CFOs, signaling that next generation is now.

So where are women CFOs coming from? Their rise points
to the benefit of succession planning. Almost 80% of
newly-minted women CFOs were internal appointments,
as many companies have turned inwards to develop and
promote women in finance. As a result, newly-appointed
women CFOs bring on average 11 years of experience in
their companies. Of the 28 internally promoted women
CFOs, only 1 had less than 3 years experience at the
company.

Not only do newly-appointed women CFOs bring deep experience within their companies; however, they also have:

96% have same-industry experience

54% have an MBA

68% have Finance Operations experience (including divisional/regional CFO experience)

To get more women promoted into the CFO seat, companies should provide more operational finance opportunities (e.g.
divisional/regional CFO roles) throughout their finance tenures to prepare them for the C-suite role, as it is a significant
common factor among people who make it to the top.

The last mile

Immediately prior to their first CFO role, these women are most likely to come
from a corporate finance background. Unlike men, almost 20% of these women
held non-finance roles just before becoming CFO, showcasing their diverse and
well-rounded experience.

Departing CFOs are looking for new
opportunities…but remain loyal

Departing CFOs are equally likely to retire or move to a new role. Of those moving to new roles, over half are moving to a new role within their company, typically becoming CEO, chief operating officer (COO), or chief administrative officer (CAO).

The majority of departing CFOs who did not retire took non-CFO roles (e.g. CEO or COO) at their current organization. Of
those starting a role at a different organization, nearly all moved to another CFO role, with the majority staying within the
same industry. Many are moving to smaller companies as measured by revenue, underscoring the wealth of opportunities
with newly-public or soon-to-IPO companies.

When it comes to CFO turnover, companies have two options: either create new and more challenging opportunities for the
current CFO (e.g. dual CFO and COO role) or risk losing them.

CFO retirement: Keep a watchful eye

While CFO retirement rates remained flat in 2021, the
average age of retiring CFOs was 55, only slightly higher
than those who moved to other roles (53) and newly
appointed CFOs (52). We may see CFO retirement rates
start to increase over the next three to four years, as
the last of the Baby Boomer generation retires or moves
exclusively to board roles, thereby adding another driver to
currently overheated CFO turnover rates.

As CFO turnover continues to rise, companies will need to
take a three-pronged approach to retaining and engaging
their CFO and broader finance talent.

Engage in career development conversations with
your CFO: What are their long-term career aspirations?
How can you create new opportunities to enable their
development and keep the CFO role interesting? This may
be key to retaining valued and tenured executives who
have outgrown their current role.

Strengthen near-term succession planning: Retirement is inevitable, so don’t be caught off guard. For
those who haven’t already, it is important to clarify the
succession plan, looking at what will be required of the
next CFO as well as which internal candidates are viable
contenders for the role within the expected timeframe.
Ideally a succession plan should be in place at least 3
years before the CFO is expected to change.

Invest in career development for the broader finance
group: To prepare for the next CFO succession as well as
the one after that, invest in mid-level and junior finance
talent, ensuring that women and those from diverse
backgrounds have ample opportunity to participate.
Create job rotations and special projects to allow them to
gain a variety of experiences – including operational roles
as well as classic finance ones – to prepare them for the
C-suite.

Additional Author

Catherine Schroeder is a member of Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Corporate Officers practice. She is based in Toronto.

2021: The Year of CFO Turnover and Strides in Gender Diversity

Download full article

InclusionIndustrialOperations and Supply Chain OfficersInclusion and Culture

Women Leaders in Operations – Breaking the Gender Inequality Impasse in India

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices