The Great Resignation: Senior leaders and the career choice trade-off | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Great Resignation: Senior leaders and the career choice trade-off

Career AdviceLeadership Strategies

Article

November 16, 2021

3 min

Career AdviceLeadership Strategies

Executive Summary

‘The Great Resignation’, has seen 4 million Americans quit their jobs in July alone, 40% of UK companies reporting skills shortages in their vacant roles.

Close

The last two years have been challenging, but they have also taught us a lot. The Covid-19 pandemic has caused many across the world to revaluate their long-term career and life goals. Although some sectors were impacted more than others, the global health crisis has shaken industries all over the world, with millions quitting their jobs in pursuit of a better life. This phenomenon, dubbed ‘The Great Resignation’, has seen 4 million Americans quit their jobs in July1 alone, 40% of UK companies reporting2 skills shortages in their vacant roles, while ONS data3 from September found that job vacancies rose to over 1 million – the highest number since records began.

The Great Resignation poses a threat to talent retention, but it also reflects a positive disruptive force. Behavioral scientists like Daniel Kahneman have revealed the extent to which we live in a form of autopilot, following a well-worn path of habits, defaults, and assumptions. It’s a useful way to preserve our conscious energy for the problems which really matter, but it can also lead us to repeat mistakes unknowingly for years on end. Until that is, we are shaken out of these habits by disruption. The TFL strikes of 2014 are a great example of this in action with researchers finding that around one in 20 stuck with their new route to work when the strike ended. How many hours of commuting would have been saved and how many miles of exercise would have been completed if only the strikes happened a decade earlier?

The pandemic has also  encouraged people to reassess their lives and rethink their priorities, even basic habits and routines had to be consciously adjusted. Leaders, who made the decision to sacrifice their free time for their career in their 20s, were suddenly afforded the chance to see their families far more. Many of them decided not to make that same sacrifice in their 40s. For this reason, we must have greater open-mindedness on what a leadership role should look like in the post-pandemic world. Over my career, I have personally experienced the impact of choosing to work flexibly. At different times, for family reasons I have worked 2, 3, and 4 day weeks, and on each occasion, there was a clear impact not just on pay, but also on how promotable I was seen to be. We shouldn’t blindly return to this way of thinking, we should work to make flexible and dynamic working patterns as acceptable for the most senior roles as they are for everyone else. If we fail to make this shift, people will inevitably feel that a return to old practices and presenteeism are the only way to the top. The pandemic has shaken us out of our automated career paths – let’s use this as an opportunity to experiment with new approaches.

One way of creating a future where leaders are less likely to follow predictable career paths is better, more active succession planning. Businesses must ask what experience, new roles, or responsibilities need to be given to next-generation leaders over the next few years to get them ready for promotion and then do something about it. All too often high potential people are identified with the note that they are not yet ready due to a certain skill or experience gap, only for nothing to be done and two years later that gap still exists. Succession planning isn’t just about identifying successors, it is about practically doing something to get them ready.

The academics who coined the term ‘The Great Resignation’ believe this phenomenon could be replaced by a wave of boomerang employees who return to the workforce thanks to a new healthier environment in the workplace. The reasoning goes that those who left their jobs may not have done so if there had been more flexible working practices in place and clearer long-term succession. The businesses that I work with seem very aware of this possibility and are both actively discussing working patterns and investing heavily in succession planning. How many of them keep it up when this crisis is a distant memory and talent appears plentiful remains to be seen.

1 Anuj Nayar, “The Great Resignation: Three Money Moves to Make Before Quitting Your Job,” Forbes, October 5, 2021.

2 Jemma King, “How to protect against staff loss ‘during the great resignation’. New research offers guidance”, Bdaily News, October 6, 2021.

3 Tom Evans, “Vacancies and jobs in the UK: September 2021,” Office for National Statistics, September 14, 2021.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices