The Undeniable Case for Sustainable Leadership | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Undeniable Case for Sustainable Leadership

Sustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesBoard Composition and SuccessionSocial ImpactEducationGovernmentBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

Clarke Murphy

September 21, 2021

3 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesBoard Composition and SuccessionSocial ImpactEducationGovernmentBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

No other time has seen such a convergence of issues affecting people, planet and profit, where divides and inequalities threaten global structures.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

In no uncertain terms, the recently published Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report detailed “unequivocal” evidence of the devastating impacts of global warming and issued a dire summation: “Bottom line is that we have zero years left to avoid dangerous climate change, because it's here,” Michael E. Mann, a lead author of the IPCC's 2001 report, told CNN.

News headlines sought to shake us out of our collective inertia:

“A Hotter Future Is Certain, Climate Panel Warns. But How Hot Is Up to Us” (The New York Times)

“It’s Now or Never” (The Guardian)

“Latest IPCC Report Predicts Disaster—Yet Again. But Not Much Will Happen—Yet Again” (Forbes)

The climate crisis is just one of many sustainability challenges that leaders must face. The global pandemic has magnified health and economic disparities. Social and racial injustices are in sharp focus. As our societies become more divided than ever before, leaders must step up and become part of the solution. What more needs to happen before effective action is taken? I, for one, will not wait to find out.

To gain a greater understanding of these unprecedented times and the progress business leaders have made towards solving the world’s most-pressing sustainability challenges, Russell Reynolds Associates commissioned global research unprecedented in its scope and scale. Fielded across 11 countries and surveying C-suite executives, next-generation leaders and employees, Divides and Dividends: Leadership Actions for a More Sustainable Future, provides data-driven insights and critical actions to help business leaders accelerate sustainability action.

The report, published today, reveals five key themes:

01. Macro, micro and “me” priorities

C-suite executives and employees agree on the big issues that most affect the future of society: climate change, pollution and global pandemics. But employees also want to see action on the micro, work-level challenges that affect them.

02. Brand-centered motivation versus value creation organizations

Sustainability actions are largely initiated by brand management or risk mitigation concerns—putting them in danger of only engaging with sustainability at a surface level. Those that see sustainability as a critical lever for value creation are set to make the biggest strides forward in the next five years.

03. The say/do divide

On environmental issues, especially progress on climate change, there is a disparity between the priority C-suite respondents claim they are doing and what employees are seeing them do. At best, organizations have a perception gap that needs managing. At worst, they are falling short of the bar that employees consider real action.

04. Next generation leaders at the vanguard

Next-generation leaders are the most engaged drivers of sustainability action. They are in the trenches, overcoming barriers and yielding results. Organizations looking to accelerate their sustainability agenda should find ways to further empower and reward their future executives.

05. Leadership and culture slow

Changing company culture and organizational complexity top the list of the greatest barriers to embedding sustainability into business strategy. To overcome these obstacles, leaders must use soft skills, such as authenticity, humility and self-awareness, to inspire change and galvanize action. Tellingly, few employees and C-suite leaders think their leadership teams display these attributes.

Today’s leaders can no longer take a wait-and-see position to make the business case for embedding sustainability or get away with bolt-on strategies. Increasingly investors and consumers are demanding more before opening their proverbial wallets.

Leaders who understand that stakeholders—employees, customers, shareholders, regulators and communities at large—increasingly expect them to make sustainability core to business strategy will be better positioned and more competitive. Shareholders are making sustainability a criteria for investment; consumers want to buy sustainable products and services; top talent want to work for companies that have a clear purpose and address inequities; and regulators will increasingly reward sustainable business practices.

Businesses thrive when society thrives. This means leaders must balance a long-term world view with immediate business demands. As evidenced in our research, addressing our most pressing societal and organizational issues requires a complete rethink of organizational strategy, operations and talent management: re-evaluating leadership mindsets and capabilities; making a frank assessment of culture; listening to employees and treating employee engagement as a strategic imperative; and developing and empowering next-generation leaders. In this report, leaders will find insights on what is and is not working and how to take necessary action – whether it be to start or accelerate.

Along with these unprecedented times is an unprecedented opportunity for leaders to affect meaningful change. Advancing sustainably for people and planet does not have to be at the expense of profit. On the contrary, as Divides and Dividends demonstrates, a triple bottom line payoff is not just a possibility, it is a reality for organizations with vision, conviction and determination to change the world for the better—and disprove those apocalyptic headlines.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices