The New Wellness at Work: Improving Culture via Employee Well-being | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The New Wellness at Work: Improving Culture via Employee Well-being

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsInclusionCulture RiskTransformation and InnovationCulture Analytics

Article

May 05, 2022

18 min

Leadership StrategiesIndustry TrendsInclusionCulture RiskTransformation and InnovationCulture Analytics

Executive Summary

To ensure your organization is equipped for the volatile labor market, prioritizing organizational culture by supporting employee well-being is crucial.

Close

How Leaders Can Improve Culture by Prioritizing Employee Well-being

The Great Resignation, The Great Rethink,
or The Great Reprioritization—regardless
of the terminology you prefer, the reality
is that we are living through a period
unlike anything in the global history of
work. To ensure your organization is
equipped to handle these shifting times,
prioritizing organizational culture by
supporting employee well-being is crucial.

First: what is well-being? At Russell Reynolds Associates, we define
it as the overall mental, physical, emotional, and economic
health of employees. Well-being is influenced by various factors,
including co-worker relationships, organizational purpose and
mission, growth opportunities, and the tools and resources
employees have access to.

Currently, overall employee well-being is in a dire state. According to non-profit
organization Mind Share Partners, 84% of employees in the United States
reported at least one workplace factor that negatively impacted their mental
health in 2021. Furthermore, 50% of employees claimed to have left their jobs
for their mental health in 2021.1 Comparatively, the question of why leaders move
jobs is less examined. In our 2022 Global Leadership Monitor, which surveyed
over 1,500 leaders across role, sector, and industry worldwide, Russell Reynolds
found that 20% of leaders who left a job in 2021 did so to prioritize their physical
and emotional well-being. Even more noteworthy: 37% of CEOs made the
same choice. With continued reshuffling in 2022, these numbers will invariably
increase among both junior and senior staff.

84% of employees in the
United States reported
at least one workplace
factor that negatively
impacted their mental
health in 2021

50% of employees claimed
to have left their jobs
for their mental health
in 2021

20% of leaders who left a
job in 2021 did so to
prioritize their physical
and emotional
well-being

37% of CEOs left their job to
prioritize physical and
emotional well-being

To understand how employees are feeling about their organization’s culture and the level of leadership support they are
receiving regarding well-being, Russell Reynolds administered a global culture imaging survey that reached over 10,000
people over the past year. We also surveyed 87 global human resources leaders across all sectors. Overall, we learned that
while executives are taking culture and employee wellness seriously, there is still a gap between intention and execution.
To address this, we developed a leadership framework that centers wellness and, by extension, culture. This framework
includes the following principles:

01 Your employee is your first customer

Investments and mindset shifts that support employee well-being, leading to increased
customer satisfaction and community involvement

02 Leadership competencies

Behaviors and skills that support well-being at all seniority levels

03 Recommendations

How to incorporate wellness expertise into your leadership team and organizational strategy

There is a gap between
leadership and employee
expectations around wellness

Recognizing the need to address culture concerns in this
new way of working, HR leaders are taking steps to change
how their organization prioritizes well-being. In our “2022
HR Leaders Global Wellness Survey” (N=87), 90% of
respondents reported doing something differently in the
past year to tackle employee well-being. This included (but
was not limited to) well-being helplines, mandatory holiday
time, financial gifts / spot bonuses, and additional holiday
allowances.

However, there is still work to do: only 56% of HR leaders
surveyed said that they were prepared to address their
employee’s physical health, and only half felt prepared to
address employee emotional health. Looking forward, only
54% said that they felt prepared or well-prepared to tackle
employee future well-being. This points to the broader
need for leaders with specific wellness competencies to
immediately address deeper employee wellness concerns
and gaps, while also planning for a healthier future.

To further examine this, RRA administered its “2022
Global Culture Imaging Survey,” a global cross-sector
panel reaching over 10,000 employees. From this data,
we learned a significant portion of employees are feeling
the adverse effects of an organization designed without
wellness in mind. As shown in Figure 1, over one-in-three
employees reported difficulty maintaining a healthy worklife
balance with their current employer, and over 40%
said that it was tough to compete in their industry without
incurring unhealthy stress levels. Furthermore, we know
that growth opportunities are key to employees’ purpose
at work. Yet over 35% of respondents stated that they do
not feel supported to pursue personal development, and
40% did not feel appropriately recognized for their current
contributions, lessening the motivation to pursue growth
opportunities with their current employer.

Figure 1: Opportunities for Improvement in Global
Employee Wellness

Percentage of employees agreeing with each
statement

25% Reported that leaders
encouraged them to make
unhealthy choices in order
to get work done.

35% Had difficulty maintaining
a healthy work-life
balance with their current
employer.

40% Felt it tough to compete in
their industry without
risking unhealthy levels of
stress.

35% Did not feel supported to
develop new skills, take on
new responsibiilty, and
advance their careers.

37% Reported that leaders did
not provide feedback or
advice that helped them
improve.

40% Were not appropriately
recognized for their
contributions.

Given the networked nature of work today, this can have
a very meaningful impact on culture and performance.
Imagine you are overseeing a team of 12 that is carrying out
strategic initiatives beheld to tight deadlines. Would your
business plan be in trouble if four of those people left the
organization, seeking a better work-life balance? Suddenly,
these responses paint a much more worrisome picture.

The story is not much different for leaders. Our 2022
Global Leadership Monitor found that 53% of leaders felt
there were good opportunities for them at their current
employers, while 83% felt they had good or very good
opportunities in their current industry. Conversely, 20% of
the same population felt that they had poor opportunities
at their current employer, while only 4% felt that way
about the broader industry. This means that external
opportunities look considerably more compelling than
internal ones to everyone, including leadership.

While a “grass is always greener” phenomenon is part
of human nature, there have never been more people
venturing to the other side of the fence, especially when
considering their well-being.

Your employee is your first customer

The past two years left a lasting mark on everyone, fundamentally shifting the way work gets done. A few months of remote
work could have been dismissed, but the extent of our collective experience means that there is no going back to normal.
This goes beyond where we do our work—at home or in the office—and relates, more broadly, to a new prioritization system,
in which family, friends, external interests, and collective wellness takes priority over work.2

The effects of a poor culture are quite tangible. A study by MIT Sloan Management Review revealed that toxic culture was
the single best predictor of attrition during the first six months of the Great Resignation.3 The link between toxicity and
attrition is not new: by one estimate, employee turnover triggered by negative cultures cost U.S. employers nearly $50
billion per year pre-pandemic.4

Additionally, views on culture are hard for employers to accurately gauge. Most culture assessment tools often deliver
inaccurate data, as they are not perceived as actually anonymous. Even if enough employees trust in their anonymity,
the assessment often fails to focus on the substantive issues that drive employee experiences, leaving leaders with an
unclear view into what actions would be most effective.5 Often, because culture and wellness are so difficult to measure,
organizations give up on assessing them altogether.

As the war for talent continues across all industries and sectors, leaders need to prioritize employee growth and wellness
more than ever before, reframing them as the “first customer” of the organization.

New motivations in and outside of work

Going beyond the old motivators—which included compensation, title, career progression, brand name, and location—
culture experts believe that employees are and will continue to make decisions regarding work more holistically,
considering purpose and mission, growth opportunities, financial incentives (including health benefits and paid time off),
physical wellness, community involvement, mental and emotional support, and the ability to connect with one’s team in a
social, flexible way (figure 2).

Figure 2: Employment Decision-Making Model: Then & Now

Relationships are key

Research shows the massive benefits of thriving relationships within and outside of your direct team. In fact, employees
who have thriving relationships with their immediate team members report better well-being than those with poor
relationships (76% versus 57%). That said, 43% of leaders say that relationship building is the greatest challenge to
remote and hybrid working.6

It is key to remember that relationships—and wellness—take different forms for everyone. Office connectivity was long
considered a core tenant of organizational culture and, by extension, employee engagement. Before the pandemic, this
connectivity could only be modeled in the office. However, when asked how remote and/or hybrid work impacted their
connectivity with others, leaders responding to RRA’s 2022 Global Leadership Monitor were split: 41% of responders stated
that remote work negatively impacted their connectivity, while 38% reported that it actually improved their connection
with others. This shows us that there is no “one size fits all” when it comes to a workplace solution. People connect in
different ways—what negatively impacts some will be a positive life change for others.

It is also worth noting that different relationships provide different avenues for addressing wellbeing. Direct supervisors
are positioned to provide various supports though regular communication to their employees, while senior leaders can
provide the resources for meaningful interactions that might require additional investment, e.g., social events, team
building offsites, new technology, etc.

"Working remotely has many advantages, enabling employees to control how their time while
also increasing productivity. From a wellness standpoint, we are seeing many employees
benefit from remote work and having more time to allocate to overall health and wellbeing.
Yet, in retreating to our home offices, we are more isolated than ever before, and employees
are finding themselves without the inspiration and mentorship that comes from being
in-person with likeminded professionals. As we move forward in this new paradigm,
the key will be figuring out how to get the best of both worlds – balancing autonomy over
our work environments with the important bonds that are created in the workplace."

Source: Stacey Shapiro, Managing Director, Russell Reynolds Associates

The answer to creating and maintaining great working relationships is not to funnel all employees back into an office.
Instead, it involves leaders empowering managers and more junior employees to make time for networking, supporting
external social events, and allowing their teams the flexibility to engage with work and their colleagues in a manner that
feels natural for them.

Flexibility is crucial to wellness
in hybrid work environments

Leaders know that a strong culture is key to keeping
employees engaged, but this is difficult to achieve in
hybrid environments. According to LinkedIn’s Learning
Workplace Learning Report, 81% of executives are changing
their workplace policies to offer greater flexibility to their
workforce in 2022.7 But what does this mean for employee
wellness? How can leaders offer wellness solutions to a
divided workforce without well-being initiatives occupying
all their time?

If leaders institute a flexible work approach, they must
ensure that two classes of employees do not emerge
with those in the office being favored over those that
work remotely. Not only could this set back organization’s inclusive efforts (data indicates that presenteeism favors
men,8) but it could also contribute to a negative company
culture that breeds resentment and stunts employee
growth.

To address this, HR leaders should track promotions for
those in office versus those working part-time or fully from
home, addressing any gaps that might arise. Additionally, all
leaders should embrace working both in the office and from
home themselves, showing employees that they believe in
their productivity while at home. Model healthy behaviors—
for example, blocking off calendar time for a morning
walk, signing off early to attend a family function, or truly
unplugging during PTO—to show employees that this style
of working is not just tolerated, but encouraged.

Strong workplace culture leads to
higher customer satisfaction and
stronger ties to the community

Customer satisfaction

Another positive element of well-being programs: company
employees are not the only ones who benefit from them.
Customers, surrounding community members, and the
organization’s bottom-line are all positively affected by
a positive culture. Happier employees make for not only
a more congenial workplace but for improved customer
service as well. Consequently, a happy and caring culture
at work not only improves employee well-being and
productivity but also improved client health outcomes and
satisfaction.9

Community ties

According to the CDC, healthy employees not only have
better quality of life; they also benefit from having a lower
risk of disease, illness, and injury, as well as increased work
productivity and a greater likelihood of contributing to their
communities.11

The biggest influence on employee health comes from
the social, economic, and environmental conditions in
which people live, not genetics or personal choices. It is
difficult to log 10,000 steps per day if it isn’t safe to walk in
your neighborhood. People cannot have a good diet when
healthy foods are inaccessible or unaffordable. Despite
the billions of dollars invested in workplace wellness,
community conditions often limit their potential. By
promoting community health as a key strategy, employers
can reduce their health care costs and enhance workforce
availability, productivity, and engagement.12

Case Study

According to a study conducted by Harvard Business Review (HBR), higher customer satisfaction is linked to
stronger workplace cultures. HBR’s Total Motivation (ToMo) paradigm states that the six main reasons people work
are: play, purpose, potential, emotional pressure, economic pressure, and inertia.10

Based on these ToMo measurements, HBR found that in both the airline and grocery industries, companies that
motivated employees more through play, purpose, and potential (and less through emotional pressure, economic
pressure, and inertia) produced better customer outcomes. For example, Southwest Airlines receives high employee
total motivation scores when compared to the other large airlines. It, in turn, also has the highest customer
satisfaction ratings in the category. The same is true with grocery stores. HBR also saw evidence of similar trends
across retail, banking, telecommunications, and the fast-food industry as well. The data is clear: cultures that allow
for more play, purpose, and potential, and reduce emotional pressure, economic pressure, and inertia, produce better
customer outcomes. Prioritizing employee wellness to support a positive culture is thereby crucial not just for your
employees, but for your overall business health as well.

The Halo Effect

The “halo effect” around well-being suggests that investing in employees has a ripple effect that creates positive
momentum onto families, ecosystems and, ultimately, customers.13

The link between employee well-being and customer satisfaction has never been more apparent than during COVID-19.
Companies, especially those with front-line staff such as retailers and restaurants, have focused heavily on their employee
well-being to ensure employee and customer safety. Going forward, businesses should reevaluate the support they provide
their employees as a key element of achieving customer satisfaction.

Halo Effect: Wellness leads to positive effects at every level

Employees: Making employees feel
comfortable, supported,
and motivated to grow
at work

Customers: Employers doing the
“right thing” influences
purchasing decisions,
increasing customer’s
connection to social
responsibility across
industry ecosystems

Communities & Families: Offering support to employees’ families, donation
matching to a variety of charities, and giving
employees time off to volunteer at a charity of their
choice increases an employer’s reputation and social
capital, as well as employee’s sense of purpose, more
broadly, understanding and advocating for improving
public health in the communities where your
employees live allow the wellness initiatives to go that
much further.

Leadership competencies that
support well-being

Much of motivation is internal; we know that why we work determines how we work. Role design, purpose, strong
organizational identity, and personal growth opportunities all contribute to employee motivation and, by extension, the
overall culture. Leadership sets the tone for all of these “whys.”

Empathy

Empathy has always been a critical skill for leaders but, in 2022, it has become crucial to modern leadership, as the
simultaneous global crises of climate change, a pandemic, geopolitics and war, and racial and social injustices have left the
entire world exhausted.

A new study of 889 employees by Catalyst found that leaders who demonstrate empathy lead to significantly constructive
outcomes regarding well-being.14

Innovation: When people reported their leaders were empathetic, they were more likely to report they were able to be
innovative—61% of employees compared to only 13%.

Engagement: 76% of people who experienced empathy from their leaders reported they were engaged compared with
only 32% who experienced less empathy.

Retention: 57% of white women and 62% of women of color said they were unlikely to think of leaving their companies
when they felt their life circumstances were respected and valued by their companies. However, when they did not
feel that level of value or respect for their life circumstances, only 14% and 30% of white women and women of color
respectively said they were unlikely to consider leaving.

Inclusivity: 50% of people with empathetic leaders reported their workplace was inclusive, compared to only 17% of
those with less empathetic leadership.

Work-Life: When people felt their leaders were more empathetic, 86% reported they were able to navigate the demands
of work and life—successfully juggling their personal, family and work obligations. This is compared with 60% of those
who perceived less empathy.

Vulnerability

Gone are the days when leaders were the fearless solo operators sitting at the top of an organization. After the past two
years, this would appear both disingenuous and out of touch. Employees are being asked to bring their “whole selves
to work;” with the realities of working from home, they often haven’t had a choice. Leaders who are brave enough to be
vulnerable should do the same. Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership SpanTM (figure 3), which helps organizations
evaluate executive talent, places vulnerability and heroism as two sides of the same coin. A heroic leader also needs to be
vulnerable, so their perseverance and grit do not turn into self-delusions. They need to take feedback and external data to
heart and make continuous improvements to themselves and their organizations.15

Figure 3: Russell Reynolds Associates Leadership SpanTM

As new ways of working appear, definitions of heroic leaders at work may also shift. Receiving feedback on employee
opinion and referencing best practices from competitors—typically a check on the “vulnerable” side of the ledger—now also
indicates a leader’s perseverance in the face of our pandemic-altered world and a willingness to meet employees where
they are, not where leadership wants them to be.

Case Study

A leading mental health advocate at a Fortune 500 company has been championing wellness in the workplace for
years. In collaboration with the CEO, the two have acted as champions through the organization, sharing personal
experiences and recognizing that inclusion is not just about race, sexual orientation, or religion—it is about
how you invite people to be their most authentic selves. By integrating an employee-first mindset from the top
down, the organization has ignited a cultural shift across the organization by promoting inclusivity and conversation.

Empathetic leadership begets a wellness-first culture. Leaders do not have to be experts in mental health to show
employees that they care; it is enough to check in, ask questions, and listen to what employees are (and are not) saying.
However, while all leaders should embody empathetic leadership to some extent, a Chief Wellness Officer can help define
and strategically improve your organization’s culture.

Recommendations

What you can do now:

Begin with a Culture Diagnostic: To know where to
start on a culture improvement journey, you need to
know where you are coming from. Assess leaders
and employees to see 1) how they view company
culture and 2) what they are doing to encourage/
discourage what they currently view as the
organization’s culture. 3) Identify any gaps between
the two. Consider a leadership assessment that can
reveal whether your leaders have the competencies
necessary to lead on well-being issues, including
taking actions informed by the culture diagnostic.

Model the wellness initiatives you institute:
Communicating employee benefits is not enough;
employees need to see their leaders taking advantage
of these benefits to feel empowered to use them as
well. For example, if an organization offers increased
PTO to alleviate burnout, leaders should take time
off themselves. Tell direct reports that you will
be offline, unplug during the defined time, then
encourage others to do the same. Often, employees
report that they do not feel empowered to use their
accrued PTO. Leaders can help alleviate this worry
by showing that taking advantage of benefits is not
just tolerated in your organization but encouraged.

Examine Time-Off policies: Many organizations in
the United States have adopted “summer Fridays” or
meeting-free days, intended to provide more flexibility
to employees and alleviate some of the stress of the
last two years. Other countries—for example, United
Arab Emirates—have permanently shifted to a 4.5-day work week. European and Asian countries have
a more flexible model of PTO when compared to the
United States, with more time away in the summer.
Consider strategies to allow employees more time
for their own interests, thereby allowing them.

What you can do soon:

Evaluate role design at every level: Roles should
be thoughtfully created with tangible connections
to the company’s purpose in mind. Institute
performance reviews that elevate individual
strengths and areas for improvement, rather than
comparing employees against their peers.

Incorporate an employee wellness metric:
Institute bottom-up as well as top-down reviews
for leaders, tying remuneration to holistic reviews
that include an employee wellness metric. Over
the past year, Russell Reynolds spoke to numerous
clients who are creating an “employee wellness
metric,” which will be used to measure and hold
accountable leaders within these organizations. Even
if displaying empathy and thoughtfulness does not
come naturally to a leader, if their compensation
is tied to an employee well-being metric, they will
attempt to adapt their thinking. How this will be
measured is extremely complex, still in development,
and will look different across organizations.

Augment your Learning & Development programs:
Opportunities to learn and grow ranked first in Glint’s
2021 Employee Well-Being report.16 In 2019, it was ranked
ninth. This jump shows us that employees are prioritizing
their own interests and development; companies that
do not invest in employee development risk losing a
growth-oriented segment of their employee population.

Connect corporate responsibility to the community:
Collaborate with community leaders and provide
industry expertise, employee volunteer hours,
donation matching, or charitable giving. Advocate
for public policies that improve community
health—employees cannot foster healthy habits if
they live in a community where the tools needed
to build these habits are not accessible.

What you can do down the line:

Hire a Chief Wellness Officer: Well-being, like DE&I
or sustainability, does not have a one-size-fits-all
solution. Firms need to recognize that there are
multiple factors contributing to employee wellbeing.
In fact, Russell Reynolds believes that, in a
decade, most companies will have a Chief Wellness
Officer. Many companies have already hired or are
in the process of hiring for this role. This executive
can spearhead firmwide efforts and initiatives
that will lead to a healthier employee population
and a more enticing workplace for job seekers.

The scope of potential responsibilities could include:

Work environment parameters (remote, in-office, or
hybrid)

Health and safety (health habits, mental health, special
diseases prevention, medical support)

People management (career management, managerial
relationships, DE&I initiatives)

Work/life balance (meeting-free days, increased coverage
to allow for time away, incentives for sharing life outside
of work)

While employee well-being and healthy organizational
cultures are not new ideas, it has become especially
clear that both are paramount to every organization’s
sustainability. There are no easy answers regarding the
future of work, but allowing for flexible work-arrangements,
listening to employee needs, finding new ways to connect,
and leading with empathy are good places to start for
leaders looking to foster cultures that promote not just
surviving, but thriving.

Authors

Leah Christianson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for
Leadership Insight. She is based in San Francisco.
Katelyn Schoenholtz is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer
sector Knowledge team. She is based in New York.
Hoda Tahoun is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Sector
and leads the Leisure & Hospitality Practice. She also is the Chief Wellbeing
Champion for the Global Consumer Sector. She is based in Miami.

References

1. Half of employees quit their job for their mentalhealth in 2021 | HRD America
2. The Great Resignation: Challenges, Opportunities, andLeadership Implications | Russell Reynolds Associates
3. Why Every Leader Needs to Worry About Toxic Culture (mit.edu)
4. 19-1468 WCC Research Report
5. Truth, Lies and Surveys: A New Methodology to
Assess Culture | Russell Reynolds Associates
6. Great Expectations: Making Hybrid Work Work (microsoft.com)
7. Navigating the Great Reshuffle (linkedin.com)
8. Still Searching? The three things your business needs to do now to
find the next-generation of leaders | Russell Reynolds Associates
9. Proof That Positive Work Cultures Are More Productive (hbr.org)
10. How Company Culture Shapes Employee Motivation (hbr.org)
11. Engaging Employees in Their Health and Wellness (cdc.gov)
12. Why Community Health Is The Next Frontier In
Workplace Wellness (forbes.com)
13. Employee Well-Being: It is Now or Never | Russell Reynolds Associates
14. Empathy Is The Most Important Leadership Skill
According To Research (forbes.com)
15. Indispensable Tensions: Leadership Span and the scienceof C-suite success | Russell Reynolds Associates
16. Glint_WFR_May2021 (glintinc.com)

The New Wellness at Work: Improving Culture via Employee Well-being

Download full article

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices