Private Company Boards Need More Independent Directors – Sustainability Offers a Win-Win Solution | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Private Company Boards Need More Independent Directors – Sustainability Offers a Win-Win Solution

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernancePortfolio Company LeadershipSustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

Kurt Harrison

February 15, 2022

5 min

Sustainable LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernancePortfolio Company LeadershipSustainability OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

Adding independent directors with sustainability mindset is a win-win solution to accelerate value creation and promote sustainable growth.

Close

Kurt Harrison

New York

As predicted, 2021 ended up being “the year of ESG” as CEOs and corporate boards around the world stated their commitment to long-term sustainability goals. Whether driven by investor pressure, brand concerns, risk management, or a sincere belief in the potential for longer-term value creation, sustainability targets were announced to great fanfare throughout the course of 2021. With the new year now in full swing, the sustainability focus needs to shift to determining how exactly these commitments will be fulfilled. The conversation this year will be around how to achieve the measurement, reporting, and integration of stated sustainability commitments. As such, 2022 is shaping up to be “the year of ESG integration.

“The decarbonizing of the global economy is going to create the greatest investment opportunity of our lifetime. It will also leave behind the companies that don’t adapt.”

BlackRock CEO Larry Fink’s 2022
Letter to CEOs

Pressure on public company boards to deliver against these sustainability commitments continues to increase and intensify. Most recently, the CEO of State Street Global Advisors, Cyrus Taraporevala, wrote a strongly-worded letter to all of his portfolio company CEOs that is causing reverberations in both public and private company boardrooms. With over $3 trillion in assets under management, SSGA is an incredibly powerful player in driving ESG integration. Taraporevala announced a major shift in their proxy voting agenda for this year, saying “our main focus in 2022 will be to support the acceleration of the systemic transformations underway in climate change and the diversity of boards and workforces.” He adds “it is essential that boards understand their companies’ pathway to net-zero,” and says that “we will start taking voting action against directors across applicable indices should companies not meet these disclosure expectations [for Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions].” He concludes by saying “in 2023, we will hold companies and directors accountable for failing to meet these expectations.”1

Scrutiny of private companies is rising – and they are ill-prepared

This pressure is now being felt within private companies as well, especially those backed by private equity firms. Many critics have argued that the lack of transparency in private company reporting has allowed these portfolio companies to continue to operate without disclosing their carbon emissions footprint. As the wall of global capital continues to surge into private equity funds, investor scrutiny of their portfolio companies will only increase. Most private equity firms actively expanded their ESG measurement and reporting teams and frameworks in 2021. However, according to MSCI, of the 10 largest global private equity firms, only one – EQT – actually discloses their portfolio company emissions.2

As sustainability has become a crucial component of good governance, private company boards find themselves ill-equipped to deal with the non-financial considerations of ESG. Few if any of the CEOs and private equity deal partners sitting on portfolio company boards could be considered ESG-fluent, and this lack of expertise will not only detract from long-term value creation, it can also prevent a successful exit for the PE sponsor. If the private equity owners intend for these companies to IPO, having a credible ESG framework is now a fundamental requirement. This means adding an ESG fluency to the board and building an internal measurement and reporting capability to satisfy institutional investors.

Public company boards get higher scores from their executive teams than portfolio company boards when it comes to embracing ESG

In our recent Global Leadership Monitor survey of more than 1,300 global leaders, public company executives reported greater confidence in their supervisory board’s ability to embrace the opportunities of ESG than their portfolio company peers.

Confidence in supervisory board effectively embracing opportunities of ESG

RRA 2021 Global Leadership Monitor, n = 1,327 global executives

Sustainability has become a globally transformational theme, much like “digital transformation” a decade ago. However, evolution in the boardroom has lagged, as truly integrating ESG requires a culture shift in the mentality and composition of boards. C-suites and boardrooms around the world are now far more focused on the “E” and the “S” than ever before. However, very few would say they have successfully embedded environmental or climate expertise into their leadership structures, and even fewer would say they are fluent on social issues. For example, analysis by the NYU Stern Center for Sustainable Business shows that ESG credentials are almost non-existent amongst Fortune 100 board members. Only 1.2 percent have relevant credentials in the energy space, and even fewer have credentials in other areas including ESG investing and environmental law.3

The 2021 Sustainability Board Report highlighted this even further: while 71 percent of companies had sustainability/ESG committees, only 40 percent of the directors on those committees were actually “ESG conscious” 4, which the Report uses as a measure of overall sustainability knowledge, attitudes and behavior. Notably, the number of directors who met the definition of “ESG competent” –  a higher bar measuring the capacity to enable effective, embodied action – is far lower.

Independent directors will be key to progress

Corporate boards for private equity-backed portfolio companies have historically been populated by executives of the company and principals from the PE sponsor. As a result, the vast majority of these boards lack independent directors, and are missing out on the industry expertise, leadership and global perspectives these directors can provide. Research has shown that independent directors provide an important governance mechanism that leads to improved board effectiveness.5  The best way to improve board effectiveness is to update board composition; and the fastest way to improve board composition is to increase the number of independent directors, which studies have shown leads to greater transparency and improved financial performance.6  However, only 25 percent of private companies have independent directors, and that percentage is even lower for private equity-backed companies.7

“Today’s boards are just not equipped to deal with today’s challenges. They don’t reflect the real world anymore. The world has moved on, and, frankly, many of the boards have not moved on…in ESG knowledge. We have a problem…that with the urgency that we need to act right now, boards might become a bottleneck.”

Former Unilever CEO
Paul Polman

It seems clear that private companies would benefit in many ways from adding independent directors to their boards. In determining the criteria for these independent directors to be immediately accretive, targeting senior executives who possess both a track record as high-performing business leaders and ESG awareness seems to offer an excellent way to address multiple needs at once. Many private companies are leading by example in this regard: Liberty Mutual recently added the world-renowned ESG expert George Serafeim to their board as an independent director; and Sphera Solutions added the former Chief Sustainability Officer from General Motors, Dane Parker, to their board. These directors offer both hands-on expertise as sustainability practitioners, as well as the requisite  credibility as business leaders to avoid being marginalized in the boardroom as “the sustainability director.” As privately held companies seek to accelerate their value creation in a world focused on sustainable long-term growth, adding independent directors who can deliver sustainability expertise is a win-win solution.

Footnotes

1 Cyrus Taraporevala, “CEO’s Letter on Our 2022 Proxy Voting Agenda,” State Street Global Advisors, January 12, 2022
2 Linda-Eling Lee, Meggin Thwing Eastman, “2022 ESG Trends to Watch”, MSCI, December, 2021
3 Tensie Whelan, “U.S. Corporate Boards Suffer From Inadequate Expertise in Finacially Material ESG Matters”, NYU Stern Center for Sustainable Business, January, 2021
4 Frederik Otto, Nicolas Alexander, Tias van Moorsel “The Sustainability Board Report 2021”, The Sustainability Board Report, 2021
5 Naciti, “Corporate Governance and board of directors: The effect of a board composition on firm sustainability performance”, Journal of Cleaner Production, 2019
6 François Neville, Kris Byron, Corinne Post, Andrew Ward “Board Independence and Corporate Misconduct: A Cross-National Meta-Analysis”, Journal of Management, Vol. 45, Issue 6, 2019
7 Ann Shepherd, Gené Teare “2020 Study Of Gender Diversity On Private Company Boards” Crunchbase News, March 2021

Leadership StrategiesPortfolio Company LeadershipVenture Capital and GrowthPrivate EquityFinance Officers

Identifying Best-in-Class Portfolio CFOs in Asia Pacific

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

The Path to the Boardroom for Technology Executives

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices