Discovering Tomorrow’s Digital Leaders: Are You Looking In The Right Places? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Discovering Tomorrow’s Digital Leaders: Are You Looking In The Right Places?

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationConsumerFinancial ServicesHealthcareIndustrialPrivate CapitalTechnologyProfessional ServicesTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Article

October 27, 2021

5 min

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationConsumerFinancial ServicesHealthcareIndustrialPrivate CapitalTechnologyProfessional ServicesTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The pressing need to capture the benefits of digital transformation has led organizations to rethink their operational models and how they can implement change.

Close

The confluence of COVID-19 and changing work dynamics have forced businesses to consider how aligned—or misaligned—their operations are with rapid digital transformation.

The economy is increasingly witnessing a bifurcation between businesses that proactively embraced change and those that adopted a conservative approach in hopes of gaining more clarity in the future. In our study into the six Covid-era leadership imperatives, we found that crises accelerate transformation efforts and are often the catalyst for changes that leaders had long put off or pushed back against.

McKinsey also found in its recent study on the acceleration of digital adoption that organizations have reached a technological tipping point. Companies that executed successful responses to the crisis reported a range of technology capabilities that others did not. Most notably, these include filling gaps for technology talent, the use of more advanced technologies and higher speed in experimenting and innovating. Conversely, risk-averse companies lost a year of evolution during the pandemic and today are far behind their more agile competitors.

The pressing need to capture the benefits of digital transformation has led organizations to rethink their operational models and how they can implement change. While many business leaders focus on the value and mechanics of innovative technologies for digital transformation, the most effective CEOs and boards recognize that implementing and managing these profound changes is a complex human challenge.

We look at five ways organizations can find the leaders they need to steer their organizations towards a digitally oriented future—and how to set them up for success.

Think beyond Big Tech hires

When many organizations look to hire a Chief Digital Officer, or similar role, they typically look in Big Tech companies. The logic is that Big Tech executives will be adept at accelerating innovation. It is, after all, what they do each day. While this is true, there are some important caveats.

Companies such as Google, Facebook, Amazon and Netflix are typically populated by digital natives. Everyone has some level of expertise in digital technologies and competency is distributed throughout teams, not embodied in a single person. These executives have never had to debate with internal stakeholders why the business should be digitally oriented. Digital transformation is their existential reason for being. It’s in their DNA. What this means is that tech professionals recruited from these companies may lack experience in overcoming resistance to digital transformation; blowback can often be a new and confusing experience for them. So, while Big Tech executives are an important part of your candidate pool, your search should not always start and stop there.

Avoid the individual savior trap

Avoid the temptation of thinking that digital transformation can be achieved by one person alone. Leaders need to excel at building and managing coalitions if they are to coordinate company-wide changes and sustained progress.

Fighting internal criticism, inertia and skepticism requires professionals with experience in change management and justifying a vision amid institutional headwinds. Communicating the urgencies and opportunities of change is key to gaining universal consensus. Leaders must contextualize challenges in ways that do not place blame or make stakeholders feel disempowered or disenfranchised. They must successfully engage and inspire their peers, staff, bosses and their entire ecosystem of stakeholders. In the digital world, the ability to influence is as crucial as technical skills. Not everyone is capable of aligning stakeholders, so look for leaders with proven track records of doing so.

Move towards an agile culture

Pivoting without being tied down by the inertia of organizations allows businesses to iterate and optimize along a modular and dynamic timeline. This is the definition of agility. When done right, it allows a business to move faster, accelerate learning and unlock digitally enabled growth sooner.

In an agile culture, failures are not viewed as failures, but data points that help define the journey to success. Executives that were once paid to not make mistakes must now be given permission to color outside the lines—because no one knows exactly where the future is heading and some movement is often better than none.

Agile cultures are important because they allow “open source” mindsets to thrive. This is the idea that resources and ideas no longer have to remain within an organization’s four walls. Digital has less-defined borders and prioritizes speed-to-market over ownership of a product or piece of intellectual property. Leaders operating in this space tend to be more open to navigating collaborative environments where customers, partners, suppliers and vendors could also be competitors—especially when dealing with cloud-based businesses and services. In the digital era, everything is connected, and business leaders must be agile stewards of those multi-faceted relationships.

Re-think your hiring processes

Organizations should re-think how they attract talent to join their management teams and boards. Finding and vetting these candidates could mean abandoning the traditional style of interviewing where each party presents their best sides in a forced formal environment. These interviewing techniques may result in a poor cultural fit or unwelcome surprise in how the individual actually communicates, behaves or thinks.

Instead, collaborating on a 20-minute use case during the interview process will reveal their personality, professional sensibilities and style of thinking through challenges and solving problems. This exercise allows candidates to demonstrate their skill sets and explain how they will manage people and marshal resources to implement company-wide digital transformation. In this process, the employer discovers not only the cost of hiring the individual but also the cost of aligning the assets, both human and technical, this individual will need to achieve success.

Watch out for shiny new toy syndrome

Organizations must be self-aware enough to know whom they need to hire and why. Too often businesses become enamored with the latest digital technology or trend without realizing they lack the infrastructure and resources to support that level of transformation. Sometimes establishing this baseline of capabilities can take years before it makes sense to hire a game-changing technology leader to implement strategy and manage people and operations. Understand where you are in your digital transformation journey, and be clear about whether you are hiring ahead of the curve or fit for purpose.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices