How Credit Unions Can Develop CEO Succession Plans | RRA

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Credit Unions Can Develop Concrete CEO Succession Plans

LeadershipSuccessionFinancial ServicesBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Article

Robert Voth

March 08, 2022

6 min

LeadershipSuccessionFinancial ServicesBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO Succession

Executive summary

In January of 2022, the NCUA voted to move forward with mandating federal credit unions develop and follow established processes for CEO succession planning.

Close

Robert Voth

Chicago

In mid-January of this year, the NCUA voted to move forward with a mandate requiring federal credit unions to develop and follow established processes for CEO succession planning.

The announcement was greeted with pushback from smaller credit unions, citing the time, energy and cost associated with developing and implementing robust succession plans that would pass regulatory scrutiny.  They are requesting that r the NCUA  provide additional tools and guidance to better prepare them for their inevitable CEO succession needs.

The NCUA provides certain levels of online training and, with credit unions who qualify under low-income designations, the ability to apply for technical assistance grants to support succession planning. However, most smaller credit unions do not have budgets that allow for the external help needed to design and execute best-practice succession plans.

The concern is warranted. Succession planning is more complex than most of these volunteer boards are prepared to design and execute.

And it’s not just the smaller organizations that are struggling. At the larger credit unions, of which there are 115 with over $2.5B in assets, the challenge surrounding CEO succession planning is magnified and should be of real concern to the NCUA, CUNA, and all boards.

The credit union industry is to be admired for its ability to consistently grow membership and service standards in the face of the many crises financial services organizations have faced over the last few decades. Successes notwithstanding, the evolution of an industry built upon conservative risk management and an overarching focus on fiscal health, combined with the natural limits of growth that come with membership rules and the parochial/geographical nature of the employee base, has led to a set of unintended circumstances that justify succession concerns.

Executive management teams at credit unions, on average, consist of C-Suite leaders with long-standing tenure similar to that of the  CEOs. Their careers are often immersed in single disciplines (sales, operations, finance, etc.). They are, by and large, not a racially or gender-diverse group.  Taking all these factors together, the reason for the NCUA’s recent action becomes clear.

Within the top 50 credit unions, the most recent data shows that senior management teams (defined as business unit leaders as well as the CFO and COO, CIO, and CAO/CMO, when applicable)have an average of 15 years at the same credit union and 11 years in the same role. This statistic in and of itself is not concerning until matched with the fact that less than 15% of these executives have cross-functional experience and their average years of experience are north of 30.

Chief Executive Officers average almost 11 years in their role with a tenure of over 20 years at the same credit union. Ninety four percent (94%) of new credit union CEOs over the last five years have come from within the industry. Less than 20% are gender diverse and less than 4% are ethnically diverse.

The unique comfort afforded credit union CEOs, in comparison to their banking counterparts, combined with their compensation packages (SERP) and the above statistics regarding senior management, create a dangerous and costly situation for credit unions without dedicated succession plans.

In September 2018,  Russell Reynolds Associates conducted a study of sitting CEOs at credit unions with above $2B in assets. Eight percent (8%) said they are available to consider new opportunities. The 92% unable or unwilling to move to a new role were hindered by retirement age, relocation, compensation (SERP buyouts), and recent appointments. Little has changed in these statistics over the last three and a half years.

CEOs and board must have ready-made successors in the wings who are truly qualified, have enough career runway to deliver continuity and are confident in their chance to become CEO at their current credit union. But the few candidates that tick these boxes enjoy ample opportunity for recruitment by other credit unions.. Since most credit unions do not have established C-Suite executive development programs to create strong internal candidates, they are severely limited in their choice of executives.

To fully understand the scope of the problem, consider that on average, there is just one internal executive ready to successfully step into the CEO seat at credit unions above $2B. The math now becomes simple, as does the alarm—with more than nine out of every 10 new CEOs coming from within the credit union industry, and only 8% of sitting CEOs able to move, that one qualified executive is at high risk for recruitment.

The NCUA is right to bring this situation to the forefront. Time is not on the side of boards. It is unfair to the credit unions themselves, as well as to the hundreds of C-suite executives who have dedicated themselves to the industry, not to have access to advanced leadership training and first-rate CEO succession programs.

The good news is that boards and CEOs have options when it comes to ensuring their senior management teams are sufficiently staffed, trained, and ready for succession.

A tangible first step is defining the exact success competencies needed to be a successful CEO at a specific credit union. A credit union can do this by building a future-proofed profile of success.

Boards are required to project three to five years into the future on the shape and strategic direction of the business, the operating environment, and associated challenges and opportunities. With this map, they can define the type of leader needed to spearhead the institution. This profile provides a clear and detailed blueprint defining the role mandate, critical experiences, and technical and cultural competencies necessary for the next CEO.

With this blueprint as a foundation, the organization then must benchmark its senior talent through a comprehensive executive assessment program. This will deliver a clear measurement of strengths, gaps, potential and readiness factors.

These assessments provide a scientific granularity into what each leader needs to focus on to leverage their strengths while closing critical experience and capabilities gaps to prepare them for a potential transition. They also bring an important sense of equity to the process by objectively evaluating talent while avoiding a common trap of over-indexing on technical experience, a common occurrence in credit unions.

This exercise helps broaden the aperture to include diverse talent who have strong potential but may lack requisite experience. To accelerate leader development, Boards and CEOs should consider investing in executive coaching, CEO accelerator programs, and rotational assignments with the goal of building a larger potential pool.

Most importantly, the rising tide of succession planning lifts all ships. Even if the majority of C-Suite executives are unlikely to become a  true successor, the investment in training, rotational assignments, and leadership development pay immediate dividends to the health of the culture, executive retention and overall performance.

Credit unions face real demographic headwinds given their unique senior talent landscape, but they can surmount these challenges with the creation of thoughtful succession programs. Boards owe this to their CEOs, the C-Suite, and especially their members. Development takes time; action needs to be taken now to de-risk and build a foundation of leadership for years to come.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices