The role of the CEO in Mergers and Acquisitions | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Role of the CEO in Mergers and Acquisitions

Leadership StrategiesMergers & AcquisitionsBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Article

August 31, 2021

4 min

Leadership StrategiesMergers & AcquisitionsBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

The last 18 months will likely go down as one of the most disruptive periods that leaders will face in their careers.

Close

Despite all the challenges this year, there are signs of an improving economy. Unemployment numbers are decreasing after a substantial increase earlier this year. Many companies are increasing output. And mergers and acquisitions are bouncing back – perhaps not surprisingly, given the number of companies which have become attractive targets as a result of a challenging operating environment.

In response to the increasing interest in M&A, we wanted to write to CEOs about their role in this, based on advice other CEOs have shared with us after having gone through the process themselves.

Be mindful of the odds

No CEO has ever launched an M&A effort hoping it would ultimately fail, yet we know they often do. According to research, half of M&A activities fail to generate the value expected at the start of the process. There are many reasons why. When asked, just under half (47 percent) of executives cited a lack of understanding of both cultures as a key point of failure. And just over a quarter (27 percent) pointed to a lack of a clear and consistent strategic vision at the board level.

While those risks come from to how you conduct M&A, there is also a significant risk from who conducts it. An astonishing 44 percent of M&A efforts fail as a result of poor leadership.

What’s a CEO to do? Successful M&A leaders mitigate these risks by focusing on three core areas:

01. Executive talent

It is easy to overvalue an executive’s strengths and overlook their weaknesses, and often hard to get a true understanding of how good someone is relative to the available talent pool. CEOs who successfully undertake M&A activities use objective insights to select leaders from both legacy organizations who can successfully lead in the new, combined company’s operating environment.

Approach the work from three perspectives:

01. Competency-based interviews to get honest, insightful data from the candidate

02. Scientific psychometric assessments that give detailed insights into the individual

03. Structured referencing to get outside perspective to confirm or refute the information

The data you collect can be used in multiple ways, and should help you answer multiple questions. You will want to benchmark your candidates against the broader talent market, evaluate them against well-defined success profiles, and assess them for cultural fit. Additionally, it is critical to objectively estimate their future growth potential, identify any potential leadership risk factors, and gauge their retention risk.

The last item is important: It will take a significant amount of work to build your new executive team – you want to make sure you get it right the first time, and don’t have to replace anyone too soon.

02. Board effectiveness

In addition to putting the right management team in place, a new company needs the right board of directors to oversee the enterprise. CEOs who successfully undertake M&A activities design their new, combined company board with the right composition, performance expectations and governance processes to unleash maximum value from the M&A.

When considering candidates for the board, spend time getting to know them well, and making sure they will engage in the boardroom in the most productive ways possible. Specifically, our research has shown1 that seven boardroom behaviors and activities have an outsized impact on building engaging, effective, and productive supervisory boards:

01. A chair who fosters and facilitates high-quality debates

02. A chair who draws out the relevant expertise of the independent directors

03. Directors who are open to new ideas and ways of doing things

04. Directors who keep the discussion focused on the matter at hand and eliminate tangents

05. Non-executive directors who are willing to constructively challenge management when it is appropriate to do so

06. Non-executive directors who build and demonstrate trust among fellow directors

07. Non-executive directors who are careful and avoid crossing the line from oversight into operations or management

By focusing on director candidates who demonstrate these behaviors, you can create a board that maximizes the potential value of the M&A effort.

03. Organizational culture

The right leaders and right board aren’t enough, of course – you also have to build an organization with the right culture. CEOs who successfully undertake M&A activities identify and accelerate the cultural elements from both legacy organization that will drive the desired behaviors and outcomes in the new, combined company.

What factors should CEOs be thinking about? Focus on the big six:

01. Values: What are the core beliefs or principals the company will always follows?

02. Environment: What type of workplace will you create, and how will it impact employees?

03. Management Style: What management style will the organization recognize, reward, and encourage?

04. Leadership Behaviors: What specific behaviors must every leader embody in the organization?

05. Key Capabilities: What will all employees know and do, and how will it contribute to the organization?

06. Communications: What will be the type and frequency of formal communication used between leaders and employees, and among peers in the new organization?

Getting organizational culture right from the very start sends a message about what matters most, and what kind of organization you are building. It creates a foundation for lasting success.

Your role in all this

Mergers and acquisitions are a team activity – they require significant contributions for every part of the organization to be successful. But you have a critical role to play as CEO in orchestrating the effort, and owning the result. Do it right, and you deserve all the accolades you will receive.

https://www.russellreynolds.com/insights/thought-leadership/goingfor-gold-the-2019-global-board-culture-and-director-behaviors-survey

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices