Planning for 2022? Here are Three Tenets for Your Playbook | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Planning for 2022? Here are Three Tenets for Your Playbook

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Article

Clarke Murphy

December 14, 2021

4 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadership

Executive Summary

As we move closer to closing out the year, clients are increasingly asking for advice in building their 2022 plans.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

As we move closer to closing out the year, clients are increasingly asking for advice in building their 2022 plans. If there is one thing we have learned over the past two years, it is that the traditional methods for planning during stable environments have missed the mark, and we must build a plan that flexes as we continue to stabilize. This is a critical time to think about the most pressing business challenges and set a game plan for growth, change, and innovation. In conversations with clients, I am urging them to view planning not as an exercise, but rather as an opportunity to take a deep look at the past and current state and write a new chapter into a future state, one that centers around three core characteristics that I believe are essential as we head into 2022: agility, relevancy, and inclusivity.

Agility Is Everything

The pandemic taught us many lessons, but one of the most prominent for me has been learning to use change as a weapon—for competitiveness, innovation, and success. Over the past two years, Russell Reynolds Associates made a conscious choice to be agile. We created new programs, hired new talent, and developed new leadership solutions for our clients. At a time when we were torn apart physically, we completed nearly twice as many client projects and took market share. This was only possible because we rallied around one another and committed to trying new things and working in different ways.

When you do not see change as a threat, or fear the ambiguity of the unknown, you can pivot quickly and deploy creative solutions. In other words, you are best positioned for success.

Choose Relevance Over Reverence

Don’t be reverent; remain relevant. When we work with boards, the biggest hurdles they face are defining their strategy and positioning leaders to stay relevant. A lot of boards focus on the now, instead of the next. As a result, they end up mirroring the strategy and leadership ideals that work today, instead of thinking about what the company is going to need tomorrow. One of the single most important things you can do in 2022 is to encourage your board to engage in healthy debates on relevancy. That is how you inspire and grow your company and your people.

I spoke recently with Jim Hagemann Snabe, an inspiring IT leader who shared insights on the redefining moments that enabled him to lead transformation at SAP and at 100+ year-old companies Siemens and Maersk. He stressed the importance of reinventing from a position of strength, focusing on the possibility of what a company can become, rather than dissecting last quarter’s numbers. He talked about power versus impact, and said, “If you think you are leading and you look back and there is no one else behind you, maybe you are just out for a walk.”

There is No Integrity Without Inclusivity

In a recent conversation with 15-year NFL veteran Troy Vincent, now EVP of Football Operations for the National Football League, he summarized a sentiment I wholeheartedly support, saying, “We are all drinking from the wells we, inclusion is a choice.”  Inclusion does not just empower others, it brings awareness and clarity to problems and fosters a courageous, accountable and collaborative environment.

Our research shows that organizations have made some progress on particularly at lower levels, with 72% of employees saying that they do not think their race, religion, gender, or sexuality would affect their chances of getting a job at their organization. Yet bias and favoritism still have a stronghold at the top, with 64% of the C-suite saying that senior leaders in their organizations show a bias or favoritism towards those like them. While C-Suite leaders are clear-eyed on the problem, they are clearly still grappling with how to improve inclusivity and hit concrete goals.

The past 24 months have presented more challenges, more surprises, and more experiences than anyone could have expected, and as a result, we should have the most diverse perspectives and incorporate those into our business planning. To get where we want to be, we must be intentional and incite action.

Leadership is not about the power you have, but about the impact you can make, and if we lead with that mindset, guided by agility, relevancy, and inclusivity, we inspire others and together we write much more than a plan, we write our own destiny.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices