The Importance of Attracting Senior Tech Talent to the GBA | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Importance of Attracting Senior Tech Talent to the GBA

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationConsumerFinancial ServicesIndustrialTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchCulture Analytics

Article

Olivia Liang

May 10, 2022

3 min

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationConsumerFinancial ServicesIndustrialTechnologyTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive SearchCulture Analytics

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Training top-notch talent is critical for GBA companies. The availability of talent, and technological change are among the 5 biggest factors impacting companies.

Close

Olivia Liang

Shenzhen

Globally, the pandemic has accelerated a shift towards technology, and demarcations between the technology sector and other industry verticals are breaking down faster than ever before. The pandemic has let tech and digitally-advanced companies rise above the rest. The focus on science and technology has also accelerated in China with the government fully implementing reforms and policies around these areas1. The Greater Bay Area (GBA) will play an important role in these plans: Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao region was picked as a national champion for innovation and technology development by the Central Government.

The vision is to transform the GBA region into a world-class hub for innovation, technology and talent. Signs of progress are noticeable, with an increase in investment in technology companies and a surge in the number of technology companies that have IPO’d in the last three years: from less than 10 in 2019 to over 40 last year2. The GBA is now home to 43 unicorns valued at a combined US$1.1 trillion3. It is also the home ground for 25 Global Fortune 500 companies, outgrowing New York Bay Area or the San Francisco Bay Area, representing industries like financial services, technology, and manufacturing.

Training top-notch talent is critical for GBA companies to sustain its growth and its competitive position globally, and not surprisingly, a key goal as part of China’s reforms.  The availability of key talent and/or skills and the rapid technological change are among the five biggest factors impacting organizations across all sectors4. Our research shows that the technology sector is the most concerned around talent skills shortage, with 69% of technology executives stating this was in the top five risks, and only 46% of technology executives agreeing that leadership is prepared to address this talent issue.

That there is a war for this talent ongoing is evident by the rapid demand for technology, data, and information officers. “Whilst our client engagements across China have steadily grown with in the last 3 years, the demand for Tech Officers has tripled” Harry Lin, Managing Director for RRA’s Greater Bay Area offices Shenzhen and Hong Kong. Furthermore, companies are increasingly recruiting leaders externally, as shown by our analysis of senior Tech Officers hiring. “Our clients have realized the benefits of engaging with us for our services to ensure they are hiring the right leader”.

Attracting top tech talent in this hyper competitive landscape isn’t easy. “Companies in the GBA area need to think beyond just their company brand and an attractive compensation package”, Olivia Liang, Executive Director in RRA’s Shenzhen office.

While these are of course important factors for tech leaders, our experience and research finds that top candidates value other important factors such as mission, purpose, and impact; the ability to build, learn, and grow; the responsibility of owning a technology or service line; internal and market visibility; and developing leadership skills in proximity to the chief executive officer . Location has also been an important consideration for technology leaders – they have the tools to work remotely and will opt to be wherever is best suited to get the job done.

“It can be challenging to relocate tech leaders, as very few leaders are keen to commit to a new position that is across the country, or even in a different region, or different country, especially with the current uncertainties around the pandemic”, Olivia Liang. Companies in the GBA area will need to address these challenges . In order to help organizations with attracting and retaining the best talent, it is important that organizations think more holistically about the technology functions within the organization:

Ultimately, there is no one-size-fits-all when it comes to attracting and retaining technology talent. Organizations will need to continuously assess what the right talent is for them, what governance structure works for the organization as well as will attract and retain talent, and what vision and culture is needed to advance their business model. “We ensure our services are tailored to the specific needs of our clients, and we help our clients with not only finding and assessing the right leadership talent, but also ensuring a proper onboarding and transition of these senior leaders. We also advise our clients on what organizational culture will support the vision and goals they have, and how to increase the effectiveness of their entire team”. Harry Lin.

1 Science and tech reforms priority for new year - Chinadaily.com.cn
2 Pitchbook Analysis, 2022
3 SCMP “How does the Greater Bay Area raise unicorns?” 10 May 2021
4 Russell Reynolds Associates (2021) “Global Leadership Monitor”
5 Russell Reynolds Associates (2021) “Building a Best-in-Class Data Function”

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices