The Ukraine Crisis: How are global CEOs responding? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Ukraine Crisis: How are global Executives responding?

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHuman Resources OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

March 24, 2022

3 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHuman Resources OfficersBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

How many companies are exiting Russia and what are business leaders’ biggest concerns about the war?

Close

The war in Ukraine has sent shockwaves around the business community, with a host of high-profile global corporations pledging their support to Ukraine and promising to act. But what actions are they taking? How high is the Ukraine crisis on the leadership agenda? And what proportion of companies have stopped operating in Russia so far?

We recently polled CEOs, C-suite leaders, and board directors to find out more about how global executives are responding to the Ukraine crisis—and their thoughts on how the war will impact their operations and people.

A version of this article was originally published on 24 March 2022 based on responses to our Global Leadership Monitor survey collected between 16 March 2022 and 21 March 2022.  Since the survey was still in the field when the original article was published, this article has now been updated to reflect the full set of responses collected from 16 March 2022 to 2 April 2022 with additional regional cuts. Where the analysis has changed significantly from the original article, it is noted in the text.

How high is the Ukraine crisis on the leadership agenda?

Just under two-thirds of CEOs and C-Suite Leaders say that their executive leadership team has met to discuss Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.  Given their proximity to the conflict, executive leadership teams in Europe are most likely to have met (79%). Less than half of boards have convened to discuss the issue globally, with Asia (16%), the Americas (32%), and Oceania (Australia and New Zealand) (26%), significantly lagging Europe, where over six in 10 boards convened to discuss the war in Ukraine.

Leadership Teams Convening to Discuss the War in Ukraine
(Percentage of respondents reporting team has convened at their organization)

Review Board Leadership and Performance in a Crisis for 3 key principles boards should follow at this time.

What humanitarian actions are companies taking?

CEOs and Chief Human Resource Officers have so far concentrated efforts on fundraising drives. Only a minority say they’ve completed more complex activities, such as dispatching equipment and supplies or providing logistical support. European companies have been most active in offering aid, and Asian and Oceanic companies least active.

Aid Mobilized by Organizations
(Percentage of CEOs and CHROs)

(n=261)

How many companies have withdrawn from Ukraine?

Organizations that have teams and businesses in Ukraine have been faced with immediate crisis decisions, especially those that have offices or facilities near the front lines.

Of the CEOs and C-Suite leaders we surveyed, 12% reported that they have offices or facilities in Ukraine.  Just under half (47%) reported that they have shut down their facilities or offices (or are in the process of doing so) while a clear majority (65%) reported that they have evacuated staff (or are in the process of doing so).

(n=75, insufficient n to report on Asia separately; no leaders in Oceania reported having offices or facilities in Ukraine)

How many companies have exited Russia?

Despite the press attention on high-profile corporate exits from Russia, our data indicates that more companies are staying in the country than you might think—at least for now.

Of the CEOs and C-Suite leaders we surveyed, 18% said they had offices or facilities in Russia. Just over a third (37%) said that they shut down their facilities or offices in Russia (or are in the process of doing so) and this is an increase from the 28% originally reported on the 21st March. Additionally, 22% said they have evacuated staff (or are in the process of doing so).  Companies in Asia are notably less likely than those in Europe to have taken either of these actions (note that the n is relatively small for Asia, at only 18 executives).

Decisions on exiting Russia and the process of doing so fully is not a straightforward one. Considerations towards one’s Russian employees, the risk of seizure of assets, IP, and trademark appropriation, as well as other supply chain and operational considerations, are all real.  As the war approaches its third month however and the brutal toll on civilians mounts those considerations may become increasingly less important.

Actions on Offices or Facilities in Russia
(Percentage of CEOs and C-Suite leaders who indicated they have offices or facilities in Russia)

(n=114; insufficient n to report on Oceania separately)

How concerned are leaders about business in Russia and Ukraine?

Close to 6 in 10 leaders globally are concerned about understanding and aligning with sanctions against Russia.  Concern levels are highest amongst leaders in Asia (67%), notably ahead of their peers in the Americas (52%). While upward of half of leaders globally, for whom it is applicable, are concerned about the continuity of relationships with suppliers and/or customers in Russia and Ukraine, leaders in Asia are again most likely to be concerned.

Concerns Operating in Russia and Ukraine
(Percentage of CEOs and C-Suite leaders concerned or very concerned*)

(Respondents for whom the issue was “not applicable” were excluded from the analysis).

What human capital concerns do leaders have?

Employee welfare is top of mind for business leaders. This extends beyond supporting employees who have families in the region (a concern for 72%) to the broader emotional impact on all employees (a concern for 72%). Additionally, 79% are concerned about the impact of cost of living increases on employees.

While wage inflation will be one factor leaders need to consider, the more important and more immediate concern will be for the ability of their lowest-paid employees to make ends meet.

Human Capital Concerns
(Percentage of CEOs and C-Suite leaders concerned or very concerned)

(Respondents for whom the issue was “not applicable” were excluded from the analysis).

There is an interesting difference between responses in Asia and those in the Americas and Europe on two issues. In Asia, fewer, at just over half, of leaders are concerned about the emotional impact on employees, but notably, more leaders in Asia (43%) are concerned about tensions between employees who take a different stance on the issue, than in the Americas (29%) and Europe (22%). This is likely a factor of the different types of relationships countries have with Russia today, and have had historically.

What business impacts do leaders anticipate?

On the heels of a two-year global pandemic, leaders are bracing for more business volatility—from cyber security concerns to increasing prices and supply chain disruption. These concerns are consistent across regions.

For organizations with long or complex supply chains, access to supplies, redundancy, flexibility, and resilience will be key differentiators, replacing a traditional focus on speed.

Broad Business Concerns
(Percentage of CEOs and C-Suite leaders concerned or very concerned)

(Respondents for whom the issue was “not applicable” were excluded from the analysis).

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices