It’s Non-Negotiable: Your Next CEO Needs This Skill | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

It’s Non-Negotiable: Your Next CEO Needs This Skill

CEO Succession

Article

Dean Stamoulis

April 29, 2022

5 min

CEO Succession

Executive Summary

Board expectations for CEOs are evolving, and the list of CEO ‘nice-to-haves’ and requirements has grown—exponentially.

Close

Dean Stamoulis

Atlanta

Many of the traditional expectations of a CEO are still important. CEOs still need sharp strategic thinking skills along with the ability to lead with confidence and have a clear strategic vision. But one key trait is becoming more important than ever before, and it’s potentially the single biggest decider of whether or not a CEO hire will be successful.

That secret ingredient is empathic accuracy the ability to understand and relate to others—and to incite people into taking meaningful action.

The Insightful CEO

The trope of the maverick savant CEO ("He might be a nasty piece of work but, by god, he gets results!") has grown long in the tooth.

Instead, today’s best and most successful CEOs don't brute force results. They galvanize the organization, using their high empathic accuracy to connect with others and make sensitive—yet decisive—decisions.

For this type of CEO, social awareness and interpersonal skills are a maker or breaker of success.

Common traits of Insightful CEOs

Our studies show that boards are increasingly prioritizing social skills and emotional intelligence in their CEO hires.

But social skills involve more than an ability to schmooze. Socially adept, CEOs with empathic accuracy have:

01. An ability to influence and develop others

Empathic accuracy helps a CEO understand people’s ‘ticks’ and navigate the emotional intricacies of the workforce landscape around them.

They positively influence those around them and those further afield, encouraging all to pull toward a common goal. And they are able to identify and cultivate senior level talent in order to build effective leadership teams that meet the needs of an evolving organization.

Today’s interconnected business landscape also means external collaboration is imperative. Which is why the modern CEO also needs to be personable and capable of striking up gainful, ethical partnerships with other companies.

02. Broader sensitivity and progressiveness in actions and thinking

The CEO’s empathic accuracy also lends itself to broader sensitivity in their actions. They connect authentically to the need for diversity, equity, and inclusion, and have a mindset geared toward sustainability. They are more empathic towards their people and infuse purpose and meaning into everything they do—and, crucially, foster a similar sense of purposeful empathy throughout the organization.

And, because they are doing this authentically, they are more likely to make real progress—especially compared to those who merely see issues as boxes to tick. They’ll have the courage (and the emotional strength and motivation) to transform their organization, helping to draw others into living the organization’s values.

03. Responsiveness and an ability to collaborate with stakeholders

CEOs need to have an openness to their interactions with the board. Nothing heralds a quick end to a CEO’s tenure faster than defensiveness. As one of our clients put it: “Our board wants someone who will listen and authentically respond.”

A CEO with a developed sense of empathic accuracy is also able to anticipate and respond to situations and stakeholder challenges better. They do this by building supportive leadership structures around them and soliciting input and solutions from broader sources (while still maintaining their own judgment). By doing so, they are able to lead their team in building a more conscientious, conscious organization.

Why is all of this important now?

Arguably, it was always important. But the new prominence is directly linked to changing social expectations in response to evolving technology and increased transparency.

People expect more from businesses. We now look to organizations to be led by Sustainable Leaders—those who are socially responsible and truly stand for something, while also building high-performing teams. Boards are aware of this and expect more of their CEOs as a result.

That puts the modern CEO in a tricky position. They are more culpable and accountable… but also have less absolute authority.

In the absence of command-and-control leadership, the modern CEO needs to be able to orchestrate influence organically—motivating change by inspiring a desire to follow rather than compulsion.

So while it’s true that the most high-performing CEOs have high empathic accuracy, it’s about more than just their personal ability to empathize. Crucially, insightful CEOs also need to know how to raise the emotional intelligence and social accountability of the organization around them.

And that is what the emotionally insightful organization is: it's one that, guided by the positive influence of its CEO, materially changes its culture and behavior to incorporate emotional intelligence at every level.

The emotionally insightful organization

CEOs are the stewards of an organization’s values. They mold the living entity that is the growing organization, giving it direction and building the momentum that spurs people into action.

Which is why it’s imperative that boards choose the right person for the job.

Real, sustainable culture change comes from the mass adoption of a new mindset. And that can only be achieved with a leader that leads by example and motivates through a shared set of values and drivers. Someone who ‘walks the talk’ and truly believes in what they’re advocating for.

Moving forward, the emotionally insightful organization will be at the forefront of change.

They’ll be the organizations leading the charge and building work structures that are more socially accountable, more conscious, more diverse, and more sustainable.

They’ll be the organizations improving the way the world is led.

Turning your organization into an emotionally insightful one begins with hiring the right kind of CEO. But the journey to a CEO hire starts earlier than you might think—with a dedicated CEO succession planning process.

Find out how CEO succession can help you by getting in touch with one of our consultants today.

Talk to us

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices