The Hidden Benefits of a Circular Economy | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Hidden Benefits of a Circular Economy

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability Officers

Article

December 23, 2021

4 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability Officers

Executive Summary

What is a “strategic circular economy” and what opportunities does it hold for retailers and producers in sectors such as #fashion and #luxury?

Close

"Mehr Fortschritt wagen“ ("Dare more progress") is the motto of the new German government coalition. It is a motto that should not only guide politics, but also an economy in transition. In our everyday exchanges with business representatives, we see the growing importance of a comprehensive sustainability agenda that provides answers to the most pressing questions of our time. In the face of the global climate crisis, more and more entrepreneurs are asking themselves how they can not only make their business sustainable, but also keep it economically viable or even make a profit with sustainability measures. For this reason, a concept that can be described as a strategic recycling economy or short strategic recycling, is gaining in importance. The aim here is to understand the topic of recycling not merely as the careful handling of waste, but to integrate it firmly into the corporate strategy and thereby uncover its economic potential.

Circular economy firmly established in coalition agenda

The recently adopted German coalition agreement actually contains a promising passage entitled "Circular Economy". In it, the SPD (social democrats), die Grünen (green party) and the FDP (liberal party) formulate their ambitions to noticeably reduce "primary commodity consumption" in the future and to set up a "national circular economy strategy" for this purpose. The aim is to bundle existing concepts and facilitate unified standards throughout Europe. In addition, the coalition partners are committing themselves to the introduction of a legally binding funds model that rewards "resource-saving and recycling-friendly packaging design as well as the use of recycled materials". In addition, "ecologically advantageous reuse, return and deposit systems" are to prevent unnecessary waste and establish a regenerative recycling system. Clearly, political leaders are putting more and more emphasis on the sustainable alignment of their policies and are increasingly scrutinizing economic projects in terms of their climate friendliness. Similar courage to seek more sustainability can also be observed among businesses, where more and more decision-makers want to take on ecological responsibility and turn environmentally friendly projects into potential profits. A thus strategically conceived circular economy can cover several aspects, and companies are often setting different priorities in their recycling efforts.

Strategic recycling protects the environment

Probably the most obvious reason to strive for a strategic circular economy is that it enables companies to meet their ecological responsibility goals. Produced waste is reused instead of ending up in landfills. French luxury brand Chanel, for example, has for some time now been committed not only to designing haute couture but also to the sustainable production of its fashion creations. In 2020, the group committed to the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement as part of its Chanel Mission 1.5°, and by the end of 2021, 97 percent of the company's own electricity consumption will come from clean energy sources. In addition, the bottle of the classic perfume N°5 is now made of recyclable glass that not only meets the company's high quality standards but also benefits the environment. Like many other companies, Chanel relies on the expertise of a CSO (Kate Wylie) to develop its sustainability strategy. Together with her team, she is in charge of the ecological transformation of the company.

Greater independence from external factors

Moreover, a strategic circular economy promises greater independence from external factors, such as shortages of commodities or potentially unreliable suppliers. Particularly in a globally networked, globalized world economy, dependence on external suppliers can lead to serious problems. The Covid pandemic made it painfully clear to all of us that the collapse of international supply chains can have serious consequences for the populations of countries and their economies. In the spring of 2020, for example, many places lacked necessary protective masks, the procurement of which and distribution to people took several weeks. An excellent example of an independent production strategy is that of the sporting goods manufacturer Adidas, which launched a recyclable sneaker in 2021. Once the shoe has served its purpose, Adidas plans to use the recyclable materials for in-house production, which among other things will save the group from having to procure additional resources.

Great potential for cost reduction

A third key benefit of a strategic circular economy lies in its significant cost-saving potential. If a company uses certain materials more frequently, it obviously incurs far fewer expenses than if it were to dispose of them. In 2017, for example, clothing company C&A became the world's first retailer to develop and launch T-shirts with an official Cradle to Cradle (C2C)® Gold certification. This involves sustainably developed fashion that takes into account the principles of the circular economy and, last but not least, also saves the company money through the reuse of raw materials. Admittedly, it must be stated that a strategic circular economy conceived in this way is not yet sufficiently profitable in some segments and therefore so far only represents a promising model for the future. However, it can be predicted with some certainty that both the ecological and economic potential of the concept are extremely high, given the increasing urgency in the fight against climate change and shrinking resource supplies.

More and more F250 companies appoint sustainability officers

The topic of a strategic circular economy will undoubtedly become increasingly relevant in the upcoming years and decades. However, to successfully implement such a transformation, a high level of specialist expertise is required. This message has already been understood by several of the largest companies worldwide. Our research shows that currently 24 percent of Fortune 250 companies have already appointed a sustainability manager to their C-suite team and 61 percent have at least one senior leader for sustainability, and it is to be expected that also in Europe more and more companies will adopt a similar approach. Now, it remains to be seen to what extent more companies will follow suit here and lace up their recycled shoes for the long march to a successful and prosperous circular economy.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices