Edie Rodriguez | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Impactful Leaders Embrace Change

An interview with Edie Rodriguez, Board Member and Chair of NRC at Saudi Tourism Authority

← Back to main page

There has been a growing number of women on boards in the Middle East over the last 20 years. So, what can we learn from these trailblazers? We speak to Edie Rodriguez, a Special Advisor to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund and Member of the Board of Directors of the Saudi Tourism Authority, on her journey to the top.

I always try to remember that you should not demand respect, you should command it.

What one learning has had the biggest impact on your career?

I have learned that you must be open to change and open to listening. I have a hunger for change, advancement, growth, and learning. It is how we push forward. By listening to the perspectives of others, you can learn to adapt things to suit the needs of your clients or your team members. Speedy Edie is actually my nickname because I am quick to embrace change.

The global pandemic showed us how important the need to be flexible and willing to change truly is. It decimated the cruise industry, forcing us to ask, “how can we pivot out of this?”

What drives you to succeed?

I drive myself to succeed. I think it is just part of my DNA. I have always been ambitious and have an innate desire to learn and push forward. A former colleague used to say of me “she operates on a different chip” because my drive and passion set me apart.

What key drivers have enabled you to get to where you are today?

I benefitted from a great education, and I am a proponent of formal education because I have seen its value. It also gives you the grounding to be open to perpetual learning, which is crucially important. I have a hunger to keep ahead of the curve. I ran the most profitable division of Amadeus, despite not being a technologist, because I learned how to motivate and drive the team.

Confidence is another key element in my success. I believe in myself and am my own head coach, supported by my spirituality and my loving family. That is not to say that you can bluff and play a shell game – you need to know your stuff.

I always try to remember that you should not demand respect, you should command it, and this has held me in good stead.

What one piece of advice would you give to future female leaders or future women on boards today?

I would say networking is one of the keys to getting on to a board. Do your homework, and make sure you get your CV and board bio in order and ready to go. Prepare a two-minute elevator spiel for when an opportunity presents itself. You need to be able to explain what skill set you will bring to the board, how you will contribute, and why. It is also important to make people aware that you are interested in being on a board.

If you are interested and have a passion for a particular company, let them know. It will not always work out, but at least you can say you have tried.

Can you describe a redefining moment that has impacted your career?

When I became a female CEO, one of the first in the industry, I had a redefining moment when I realized that some people whom I believed to be loyal had their own agendas. Whether they were undermining me or taking the path of least resistance, they were not exactly whom I thought they were. The redefining moment taught me to not be so trusting.

Edie Rodriguez has been a Special Advisor to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund and is a Member of the Board of Directors of the Saudi Tourism Authority. She is a global travel industry Chief Executive Officer and Member of the Board of Directors with four decades of international business experience and charitable involvement in varying organizations.

The interview was conducted by Mina Paul, Consultant at Russell Reynolds Associates, Dubai. Mina is passionate about building authentic and long-term partnerships with clients, teaming up with leadership teams to identify and attract diverse talents.

Read more interviews

Being a leader, not a boss

An interview with Elissar Farah Anotonios, ClusterHead for Middle East and North Africa and a member of Citi EMEA’s Operating Committee

Being a confident leader

An interview with Huda Allawati, Founder and CEO at Aliph Capital

Great leaders serve others

An interview with Iman Al Qasim, EVP of Human Capital Emirates Global Aluminum

Successful leaders don't do it alone

An interview with Sharmila Murat, Chief Investment Officer at Chalhoub Group and Board Director at multiple organizations

Being a leader, not a boss

An interview with Elissar Farah Anotonios, ClusterHead for Middle East and North Africa and a member of Citi EMEA’s Operating Committee

Being a confident leader

An interview with Huda Allawati, Founder and CEO at Aliph Capital

Great leaders serve others

An interview with Iman Al Qasim, EVP of Human Capital Emirates Global Aluminum

Successful leaders don't do it alone

An interview with Sharmila Murat, Chief Investment Officer at Chalhoub Group and Board Director at multiple organizations

We would love to partner with you

If you are a C-Suite Leader and/or Board Member and are interested in joining our women’s network, would like to partner with us, or speak to one of our experts, please fill in your details below.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices