The Future of MedTech Connected Devices: Setting the Organization Up for Success | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Future of MedTech Connected Devices: Setting the Organization Up for Success

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationHealthcareDevelopment and Transition

Interview

Stacy Braun

April 22, 2024

6 min

Leadership StrategiesTechnology and InnovationIndustry TrendsTransformation and InnovationHealthcareDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

We sat down with Jim Hollingshead, CEO of Insulet, to discuss implications of the evolving connected devices landscape for MedTech leaders.

Close

Stacy Braun

New York

Technology is rippling through industries and forcing companies to operate differently”

Jim Hollingshead

CEO of Insulet

MedTech organizations are orienting towards connected devices, and their talent needs and organizational structures are evolving as a result. Russell Reynolds Associates sat down with Jim Hollingshead, Chief Executive Officer of Insulet, to discuss these organizational changes and their effects on structure, culture, and talent. Alongside Mr. Hollingshead, we created a guideline to advise MedTech leaders on how to navigate the evolving digital landscape.

The future of connected devices

We sell an end-to-end customer experience”

The healthcare industry is notorious for lagging in leveraging technology to its fullest potential. Medical device companies, in particular, face challenges due to their traditional structures and regulatory requirements, resulting in slower innovation and market adoption.

However, increasing connectivity and technological adoption can enhance patient outcomes by improving adherence and user experience (among others). The value of this contemporary approach can be characterized as the following:

Leveraging device data and analytics: By connecting care and collecting data usage, companies can gain valuable insights. These insights include identifying group-level usage patterns, and understanding how patients interact with their medical devices or therapies.

Incorporating software to provide a connected care experience: Increased technological add-ons allow patients to more seamlessly integrate products into their routines (i.e., through a connected app on their phones), allowing for an improved user experience.

Rapidly increasing the cycle of product development: By increasing feedback and knowledge of patients’ behavioral patterns, release cycles accelerate and are more informed, fueled by constant streams of patient data providing clinical evidence and codifying the organization’s ability to constantly innovate.

Setting up the right organizational structure

The MedTech sector has matured to the point where we are able to absorb what technology is enabling”

The right organizational structure for today’s connected device companies looks very different than those of past MedTechs. A functionally-oriented organization, which tends to work well with the traditional MedTech organizations, can become a barrier to information flow and collaboration. Instead, a structure that emphasises collaboration and teamwork across all levels will enable continued innovation, which is core to connected device companies offering an end-to-end solution.

Truly innovative companies differentiate themselves from the rest by designing for:

Information flow: The speed at which the competitive landscape is moving also requires rapid internal evolution. The key: removing friction in information flow. Clear guidance on specific business – rather than functional priorities (especially in a historically functional structure) – yield greater empowerment deeper in the organization.

Innovation: MedTech companies can take inspiration from Silicon Valley by adopting a product management approach similar to tech companies (Figure 1).

While upstream marketing traditionally sat in the commercial function, it’s increasingly sitting with product and customer experience functions. This enables a far more sophisticated approach to product portfolio and road mapping, enhancing customer centricity and feedback to leverage R&D capabilities and keep tabs on market sensing.

Splitting the innovation function into product and customer experience organizations allows for a sharper focus on customer needs. The technology organization then works iteratively on building new products, while the commercial group focuses on capturing customers and delivering revenue. Communication between the functions is essential.

Customer Capture: Importantly, the commercial function focuses sharply on the day-to-day customer experience, as well as how physicians hear the message. Closely connecting commercial with product, and positioning product managers as partners, rather than overseers, ensures that the commercial function is adeptly positioned to capture customers and deliver revenue.

Figure 1: Product & Customer Experience Organizational Structure

Enabling innovation through culture

Everybody has to take advantage of what technology can enable. To do that, you have to adapt your organization and its structure, which leads to thinking about collaboration differently”

Organizational structure and corporate culture are intrinsically linked. Contemporary connected device organizations are meant to ensure frictionless information flow and priority clarification. They are designed with three key principles in mind:

An environment that fosters full transparency: The right structure enables seamless information flow and clarifies priorities, facilitating collaboration and a broader understanding of the business.

The transformative power of collaboration: A culture of collaboration encourages a fail-fast orientation and shared problem solving, leading to accelerated innovation, improved patient experiences, and better health outcomes. Augmenting the executive team with leaders who further enhance this organizational mindset drives faster transformation.

The cultural shift towards a holistic mindset: Employees in connected device companies are encouraged to think beyond their functional silos and consider the impact of their work on the entire organization. This mindset fosters curiosity, empowerment, and a drive to collaborate, ultimately benefiting the customer experience.

Determining culture is key to MedTech organization’s success. A culture that breeds holistic, elevated mindsets cross-functionally creates rich connective tissue between functions. This, in turn, translates to accelerated innovation, improved patient experiences, and better health outcomes.

The MedTech Virtuous Talent Cycle

Everybody has to be in the whole business.  Everybody should know what’s going on and should be working as a team with shared problem solving and full transparency to make the business run better. And the whole thing has to be orchestrated around the customer experience”

An organization with the right organizational design, culture, and processes will be better positioned to cycle and learn rapidly. This, in turn, accelerates an organization’s ability to innovate and speed up its time to market. Accordingly, outcomes and patient experience improve. All these elements, when done right, create a virtuous talent cycle (Figure 2).

The three principles of an effective talent cycle are:

Organizational design and culture: A well-designed organization with the right culture, routines, and processes can facilitate rapid cycling and learning, leading to improved innovation, time to market, and outcomes for both the organization and its customers.

Customer-focused mindset: Shifting from functional silos to a holistic view of the organization allows for reduced information friction and increased focus on the customer experience. This streamlining creates energy, builds momentum, and engages employees who better understand the business's goals and their role in achieving them.

Agility and continuous improvement: With increased agility and rapid learning from pain points, organizations can establish a rhythm of continuous improvement.

The virtuous talent cycle has the power to create a more streamlined product development process, as well as a more invested and engaged team. It becomes a continuous improvement cycle.

Figure 2. The Virtuous Talent Cycle

Is your organization ready for the shift to connected devices? Key questions to find out.

The next generation of connected device companies must embrace a contemporary organizational design that creates rich connective tissue across teams to promote collaboration.

As the role of connected devices in healthcare continues to expand, MedTech leaders can use the following questions to reflect on the status of their own organizations and identify areas of development.

How does your organization’s current organizational structure promote customer centricity and speed to innovation?

How does your executive team create a culture of collaboration and empowerment? How do you provide your employees with the tools to be culture carriers?

Do you have a development strategy in place that fuels learning agility?

How do you go about determining the strengths of your organization’s culture? Its weaknesses? And how do you build on both?

What mechanisms does your organization have in place to learn from its pain points?

Author

Stacy Braun is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Medical Devices, Tools and Diagnostics practice. She is based in New York.
Victoria Fibig is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare knowledge management team. She is based in New York.
Sarah Flören leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Healthcare knowledge management team. She is based in Amsterdam.

We would like to thank Jim Hollingshead, Angela Wiczek and Insulet for their valuable insights and collaboration on this important leadership topic.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices