Future Proofing the European Transportation & Logistics Industry Through Attracting External Talent | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Future Proofing the European Transportation & Logistics Industry Through Attracting External Talent

LeadershipTransformation and InnovationIndustrialExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Article

Dr. Boris Albers

May 11, 2021

7 min

LeadershipTransformation and InnovationIndustrialExecutive SearchTeam Performance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The T&L industry has a long history of low levels of gender diversity at the executive team level, which will hurt innovation and development.

Close

Dr. Boris Albers

Hamburg

The Transportation and Logistics (T&L) industry is known for its fierce competition. In its low margin and commodity service-oriented business environment, market leaders stay ahead in large part due to their keen focus on operational excellence. However, the industry is now at an inflection point, as the sweeping influence of digitalization, diversity and inclusion, and ESG mandates disrupt even top organizations . As a result, T&L leaders are beginning to realize a higher degree of transformation and innovation will be needed within their management teams to develop differentiated value propositions and remain competitive.

2021 Transportation & Logistics Industry Disruptors

Advancing to a Diverse and Inclusive Culture

Digitalization and Disruptive Innovation

Sustainability and Corporate Transparency

A top challenge for the T&L industry is the relative dearth of experienced executives with the necessary competencies and capabilities to respond to current disruptors. T&L executives often have similar training and backgrounds, coming from one of a handful of marquee organizations— and leaders who move between companies tend to hire former team members. This behavior can contribute to a lack of diversity of thought across the executive team, leaving the organization poorly equipped to respond to new pressures. In order to fill the logistics talent gap, it is imperative that companies start looking for talent from other sectors (such as fast-moving consumer goods, automotive, and digital players) that are ahead in adapting and transforming to these new market demands, despite the potential difficulty of onboarding outside talent. In this brief we investigate three primary disruptors in the logistics industry and point to concrete solutions that can help management overcome these challenges.

Methodology

To investigate the primary transformation challenges facing the European logistics industry, RRA spoke with a select set of industry executives who have successfully transitioned into the logistics industry from different sectors. These leaders shared their views of the specific qualities and capabilities that set them up for success.

Additionally, building on the findings of our 2017 T&L Executive Diversity Study, we analyzed a further sample of 90+ executives from 10 of the leading European logistics organizations to understand the demographic composition and career experiences of their leadership teams, and how those trends have evolved over the previous four years.

Disruptor #1: Advancing to a Diverse and Inclusive Culture

The global T&L industry generally does not have a track record of developing diversity. As we first found in our 2017 T&L Executive Diversity Study and confirmed with our 2021 analysis, the industry has maintained consistently low levels of gender diversity at the executive team level.

Figure 1: Executive Team Gender Diversity

Year
Percentage

2017
8%

2021
10.5%

Similarly, executive team members usually carry lengthy tenures with their organizations – many for multiple decades. Diversity of background beyond just gender and ethnicity is also crucial to foster innovation, but the logistics industry has continued in their preference to hire most of its leadership internally. For the minority of executives who were hired externally, an even smaller number carry significant experience in an industry outside of logistics. It is worth highlighting that European T&L organizations have made some progress over the last four years. Our 2021 analysis demonstrates a significant decrease in the population of multi-decade tenured executives, and the industry has marginally increased the proportion of outside-industry hires.

Figure 2: Executive Team Tenure and Origin

2017

2021

Executive team tenure

>15 years

50%

33%

>25 years

40%

17%

Origin of executive hire

External hires

43%

39%

Outside industry experience

15%

22%

“The industry’s culture is quite hierarchical, but leading in a more modern way is something that logistics needs to develop and is also how it will attract talent. Flatter organizational structures, involvement of a broader group of stakeholders and a feedback culture are all areas where transport can do better.” - Chief Operations Officer for €15 billion European transportation company with outside-industry career experience

What can be done?

A culture which rewards tenure can have the effect of preventing highly qualified, more junior talent from advancing quickly. Companies should assess how promotion and other talent decisions are made to ensure tenure does not become a hurdle to successful progression of high-potential talent.

Recruiting external talent is not a magic diversity bullet, but the success of an external hire can be actively fortified through a commitment to supporting inclusivity throughout the hiring process and the company culture, as well as a robust onboarding and in-depth executive assessment to identify potential de-railers of success.

Defining what diversity and inclusion means to your business (beyond gender and ethnicity) and how the current corporate culture supports or undermines it is essential to enacting meaningful change. Once defined, employ data and tools to measure and encourage progress.

To help out-of-industry executives transition into a new role, prioritize quick wins, and provide strong support from the top of the organization. Results and success stories communicated from upper-level management will significantly help increase traction and buy in.

Disruptor #2: Digitalization and disruptive innovation

The T&L industry is transitioning to a technology- enabled future. To maintain competitiveness and avoid commoditization of service offerings, it will be critical for companies to embrace innovation and implement digitalization.

In the past, change in the industry has been reactive and responsive rather than proactive and forward-thinking. Since innovation was primarily driven by operational excellence requirements and based on past experience, it often yielded changes that were only gradual.

How to rise to the challenge?

The first step needed to progress and innovate is to ensure the availability of real-time data across the organization’s operations. This data allows the organization to effectively craft client-specific solutions and leverage AI to optimize internal processes, allowing for additional services and a differentiated customer experience.

Talent is a key consideration. To accelerate progress, European T&L organizations should consider looking externally for talent from industries such as fastmoving consumer goods (FMCG) or digital technology that have already leveraged Big Data to provide a differentiated customer experience.

When leaders from other industries join, organizations must be ready to foster a culture of experimentation. Innovative ideas often create friction initially; leaders should be ready to persevere through trials and failures. This commitment to innovation must start at the top and be communicated regularly from all upper management.

“If you compare large to mid-size organizations across sectors, they have all faced similar troubles implementing digital. But without all functions and aspects of the company working together enabled by data, you cannot lift the organization to its full potential." - Chief Digital Officer for a €15 billion Euro logistics company with outside-industry career experience

Disruptor #3: ESG and Corporate Transparency

Across sectors, stakeholders are demanding greater levels of corporate transparency – particularly regarding sustainability and the business’ impact on the environment.

External Risk: Companies that fail to address these demands risk losing capital investment and customer demand.

Internal Risk: The next generation of logistics leaders are starting to demand more from their employers when it comes to having a driving purpose or mission. A mindset shift across the industry is critical in order to safeguard the continuity of future leadership teams.

Figure 3: ESG Performance Ratings by Sector, Global vs European Overall Average Score

Sector Name

Global Setor Rating

European Sector Rating

T&L

51

54

Healthcare

51

49

Financial Services

52

55

General Industrial

53

56

Consumer Products

54

58

Technology

54

57

Source: CSRHub analysis of 1,829 global ESG rankings, March 2021

As a downstream industry that directly contributes to the Scope-3 emissions for the bulk of the global supply chain, it is not surprising that T&L carries some of the lowest overall ESG ratings.

Europe as a region has made remarkable progress and T&L companies in Europe are ahead of their global peers, but it is clear the logistics industry has more to learn from other industries excelling against sustainability metrics.

What’s next?

Logistics companies can and should start looking to hire ESG leaders not only as sources of talent, but for best practices in operating sustainably. Decentralized and siloed organization systems must change, but more than that, the willingness of the company culture to embrace new technologies and diverse approaches will be key to sustainable success.

Meaningful progress requires sustainability to be embedded throughout the leadership culture and integrated into the objectives, incentives, and remuneration of management.

The path forward

Build an Inclusive Culture by Fostering Diversity of Thought and Experience

Embrace Data and Technology to Innovate and Maintain Competitiveness

Operate Sustainably and Transparently to Decrease Risk and Retain Talent

For the T&L industry to move beyond its highly insular legacy culture, leaders at the top must take a broader lens to their talent assessment processes and prioritize competencies such as innovation and strategic development. That does not mean that executives who are focused on KPIs and operational excellence are becoming less relevant. This is about finding the right mix in terms of diversity of thought and changing cultures to allow industry veterans and non-logistics leaders to learn from each other. Failing to do so risks empowering a culture which affirms ‘how it has always been done’ is the only way, which may even present active resistance to change, innovation and diversity. Fostering and understanding diverse perspectives and approaches from other more innovative sectors will be the key to generating differentiated logistics service offerings in an industry currently engaged in a race to the bottom on margins.

The T&L sector has the potential to attract best-in-class talent from other industries. From our interviews with executives that made the transition into T&L from a different sector, we learned that large-company scale and global opportunities were some of the logistics’ industry most attractive aspects

“The transportation industry is perfect for people who are attracted to the global experience and scale of the company’s operations.”

Chief Financial Officer for €5 billion European Transportation company with outside-industry career experience.

What to Look For? A Preliminary Checklist of Core T&L Capabilities:

Technological fluency and ability to anticipate future market shifts, adapting quickly to new business models and innovative analytics

Past experience living and working in multiple regions and cultures, in both developed and emerging markets

Customer-experience oriented, with the ability to react quickly and provide differentiated service

Experience leading or working directly with major aspects of end-to-end supply chains and implementation of operational excellence processes

Continually questions the status quo; discerning about new markets and opportunities

The T&L industry can no longer can continue to hire executives only from the typical candidate pools. It is imperative that transportation organizations focus on developing a collective diversity of thought within their leadership teams so they can leverage the experiences of those from other industries who have successfully navigated disruption. The culture of the organization must also be open and supportive of new and innovative ideas, with strong executive team sponsorship internally. Resilience and commitment from the top, starting with the CEO, will be key to finding success. Leaders must learn to look long term at the future needs of their customers and stakeholders in order to plan and shape a more sustainable future today.

Additional Authors

Grant Gilchrist is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources Knowledge team. He is based in Boston.
Katie Whittum is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources Knowledge team. She is based in Boston.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices