The Future of the Chief Risk Officer | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Future of The Chief Risk Officer

Financial ServicesLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersExecutive Search

Article

Ellen Yaffe

September 10, 2020

5 min

Financial ServicesLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Organizations need to close the gap between risk and commercial units, build data fluency in risk, and develop their risk bench strength.

Close

Ellen Yaffe

New York

A strong, commercially minded, proactive risk management function has never been more important. New forms of risk are emerging, and regulation is tightening. The impacts of macroeconomic events—including COVID-19 —are being felt in the form of an impending recession, and lack of consumer and business confidence will most likely undermine a rapid recovery.

Understanding the impacts of these risks on your business is critical. Having placed many senior risk management professionals globally—and from regular conversations with market leaders in the field—we have a three-part thesis on the ways in which the risk function needs to develop at scaled organizations.

Phase 01: Closing the gap between risk and commercial units

Developing strong business acumen within risk, to respond to planned and unplanned events.

Phase 02: Building data and digital fluency in risk

Understanding the potential benefits of technology adoption, and how data analytics can develop sophisticated models, predictive tools and greater understanding of trends.

Phase 03: Developing bench strength for the risk function of the future

Rewarding, retaining, training, and cross-training internal successors, as well as continuously infusing fresh outside talent.

Phase 01: Closing the gap between risk and commercial units

One of the greatest challenges facing risk management is the emergence of factors for which historical models are insufficient. As companies faced a global pandemic, new sources of data and insight needed to be identified to better predict risk and inform responses, sources that have not previously been a core part of risk modeling.

A commercially astute risk function is able to consider the business holistically. The chief risk officer who develops a collaborative partnership with the business’ commercial leaders, working with them from the start of an issue, provides stronger lateral thinking around the use of these data and insights, better preparing the business to deal with emerging risk factors.

In response to this, we see more risk officers than ever being sourced from outside risk functions, creating the versatile and well-rounded business experience that is critical to their success.

In particular, we see the role of risk as increasingly aligned to general management functions, with more and more overlap between the functions of risk and the commercial interests of the wider business.

Phase 02: Building data and digital fluency in risk

COVID-19 has accelerated the need to ensure that risk functions are flexible, agile, and adaptable—but this trend was well underway before the crisis began and will outlast it. Digital and data analytics are fundamental in allowing organizations to react to more stringent regulatory requirements without incurring excessive personnel spending—and chief risk officers need to be sufficiently “digitally fluent” to understand the options available to them.

CROs should, for example, be able to:

Move artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) to the core of everyday processes such as AML and Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements—reducing the overwhelming headcount burden that these processes can pose to organizations.

Fully leverage the cloud in risk infrastructure to reduce costs and increase flexibility—allowing new systems and technologies to be much more readily adopted in the future.

Deploy advanced analytics techniques to analyze risk across the organization—providing the executive team and board with full, data-driven risk models, scenario planning, and predictive modeling that will enable better decisions on the allocation of resources.

Bring modern data management practices to risk—allowing a much more regulator-friendly central source of data on risk factors.

Phase 03: Developing bench strength for the risk function of the future

As the risk function continues its rise to the top of the house and increasingly becomes a critical voice at the leadership table, companies need to sustain this momentum by building out their risk talent bench—taking a long-term view in order to future-proof the risk function.

Organizations looking to create a robust risk function for the future should:

Aggressively hire in the middle ranks of risk functions to develop a forward-looking risk culture, looking beyond typical risk backgrounds to include those with experience in functions including commercial, general management, technology, compliance, audit, finance, etc.

Proactively develop risk succession planning processes, embedding next-gen risk competencies into the organization’s succession management framework and succession planning.

Reward top performers and high-potential leaders.

Continuously develop next-gen talent by providing them crucial experiences and making emerging competencies and attributes (e.g., data fluency, commercial acumen, etc.) a core focus of their leadership development plan; cross-train rising risk leaders to help them develop the broader skillset needed to succeed.

Now that risk has a seat at the “top table”, it is crucial that the function ensures continued growth through developing a pipeline of next-gen leaders.

As the importance of the role increases, the ways in which the CRO role is set to evolve are numerous. When contemplating a new model for the risk function, some key questions to consider include:

Commercial partnership

Does your chief risk officer have credibility and depth of risk experience across multiple economic cycles?

Does your risk function have a deep commercial understanding, in order to genuinely partner with the business in an environment that is uncertain, ambiguous, and turbulent?

Is the risk function respected by the business and positioned to be proactive, involved in decisions early, and seen as an enabler?

How effective is the risk culture across the organization? Does the business see risk as a business enabler or a policing function?

How much front-line business experience do you have within your broader risk team?

How well do you see your risk team “bridging the gap” between risk management and commercial business units?

Digital/data fluency

Is the chief risk officer able to balance the needs of the role, while transforming for the future? Or are they distracted by continuous regulatory changes and ongoing reporting requirements?

Has your risk function transformed from a traditional business unit to one that leverages technology, data, and analytics to inform decision-making?

Is your risk function “digitally/analytically fluent”—does it understand the role of digital and data in building a streamlined, effective risk function?

Are your other technology functions—particularly data management—sufficiently aligned with risk to create a holistic risk management data strategy?

How much time does the risk team spend with the technology executives and the chief data officer?

Does the risk function understand how to leverage data in a sophisticated way? How sophisticated is the use of advanced technologies, e.g., artificial intelligence and machine learning?

Talent bench buildout

Do you have a robust team of middle management risk leaders—reporting to the chief risk officer —that could be potential succession candidates?

Do you have a succession plan in place to ensure a smooth transition process?

How diverse is your risk function? Can it balance traditional risk expertise with the innovation/digital literacy that genuinely transforms the function?

How innovative are your risk leaders? Do they continuously stay well informed of technology trends in the risk and compliance functions?

Is there a leadership development plan in place that will continuously train your next generation of talent, providing them with the skill set needed to succeed in the evolving role?

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices