Five Leadership Insights from the Healthcare Industry on Launching a NewCo | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Launching A NewCo: Five Leadership Essentials

Leadership StrategiesMergers & AcquisitionsHealthcareBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

Ernie Brittingham

April 20, 2021

10 min

Leadership StrategiesMergers & AcquisitionsHealthcareBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchBoard Effectiveness

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Healthcare executives starting a NewCo need to consider the board, CEO leadership attributes, functionality, culture.

Close

Ernie Brittingham

New York

Despite ongoing economic uncertainty stemming from the pandemic, public and private deal activity is surging. To remain competitive, multinational companies are turning to M&A for innovation in high-growth segments, while simultaneously divesting non-core assets.1 The ready access to capital in the public market has also led to a surge in Special Purpose Acquisition Companies (SPACs), which are adding competition to the hunt for target companies.2 On top of that, the private equity industry is poised for a record-setting year with over $1 trillion in dry powder and significant pent-up demand for deal-making.

The combination of the pandemic and the increased demand for deal-making has led many organizations to revisit their investment strategies. A large proportion of these deals have taken the form of corporate spin-offs and public and private carve-outs. The structures of these types of organizations are inherently complex to create, as they require both unraveling and rebuilding talent, infrastructure and governance systems, almost always at the same time.

Over the past ten years, Russell Reynolds Associates has advised many organizations as well as investment firms throughout the various stages of the spin-off and carve-out process. In doing so, we have gained a great deal of insight into which leadership elements are required to make these deals successful, as well as what can go wrong if left unaddressed.

Based on our experience, we have uncovered five essential leadership topics for executives launching a NewCo to consider in their transactions:

01. The board
02. CEO leadership attributes
03. Underestimated functions
04. Corporate culture
05. Timeline

01. The Board

Every NewCo needs its own board, leading to the important question of board composition. We find an increased focus on this issue as investors emphasize the value of ESG and the need for greater board diversity. Given the wide variety of spin-off and carve-out scenarios, however, there is no single formula for assembling an ideal NewCo board. They are often comprised of a combination of directors appointed from the parent company or investor and new, independent appointments. Most CEOs appreciate having at least one director from the parent company who either transfers to the NewCo or maintains a seat on both boards. A director who has been part of the spin-off or carve-out strategy, is familiar with the crafting of the transition services agreements (TSAs), and is able to understand the parent company can be highly valuable. Beyond these incumbents, selecting and appointing other board members with the right experiences for the situation is both art and science.

The key to building an effective board is to gain early alignment around the NewCo’s strategy as well as identify any potential competency or experience gaps that the board needs to address (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Principles of building an effective NewCo board

In our experience, the next step is to focus on recruiting leaders who are current or recent operators (CEO, CFO) and can contribute at the board level. In fact, current and former operators should be prioritized over specialists, and prior spin-off or carve-out experience is strongly preferred. While governance skills and industry experience are also desirable, they are less important given the highly operational day-to-day tasks of the NewCo board. Board directors who can contribute to the core mission of the new company are also essential, whether they bring end-market or industry experience as well as experience in M&A, compensation structures, a robust talent network, or a strong business transformation track record.

Figure 2: Key considerations and questions when building a high-performing NewCo board

02. CEO Leadership Attributes

First-time CEOs typically take between 12 and 18 months to acclimate to the role. This is often the same time period in which the new company is expected to be fully up and running – and significantly outperforming its previous state. Unsurprisingly, appointing C-suite leaders with previous spin-off or carve-out experience or prior experience in the CEO role is high on stakeholders’ priority lists given the lack of time for the typical learning curve.

Recruiting a leader with this specific experience is not always practical or possible. Through recent work, RRA identified the leadership characteristics that tend to set successful NewCo CEOs apart.

NewCo CEOs need to be resilient and committed to the organization, with high risk tolerance, given the uncertainty that comes with a NewCo; there are always surprises

NewCo leaders should have strong strategic acumen, as the work will require continuous problem-solving

They must be diligent and hands-on; willing to take on even the most mundane tasks as project managers – particularly in the first, lean days of the new business

Given the hands-on nature of the work, NewCo CEOs must be willing to hold themselves personally accountable for results

They must be adaptable, not discouraged by setbacks, given the reality on the ground may be nothing like the assumptions going in

Finally, a strong sense of urgency will mean they can get the work done, no matter the challenges

03. Underestimated Functions

What are the most critical hires for a NewCo to make? Aside from the importance of building a strong, diverse board and hiring a CEO, there are a few C-level roles that are essential to fill first when setting up a new company. Sometimes these most vital hires are also the most underestimated. In hindsight, spin-off and carve-out leaders mentioned they would place far more emphasis on the human resources, finance and IT functions.

Human Resources: Much of a NewCo’s success depends on the quality and drive of the organization’s talent. Considering that a NewCo can typically lose 40 to 80 percent of its existing leadership team and mid- management in the first 12 months, the CHRO should ideally join the CEO on day one as a close strategic partner. In addition to hiring new talent and implementing strong retention tools, a successful CHRO will help the CEO establish the new organization’s culture. In our experience, nearly all CEOs regret not hiring this role sooner, or not hiring a senior enough leader.

Finance: A forward-looking, operational CFO is essential as this leader will be required to build out the finance function, including tax, treasury, and accounting. Additionally, the NewCo will need to begin detailed reporting before the new systems are fully in place and while some financial data may still be with the parent company. In a PE carve-out scenario, the CFO takes on added importance in managing large amounts of debt if the NewCo is highly leveraged. The CFO is mission-critical from day one and ideally has private-equity backed, prior NewCo, turnaround, or crisis experience.

Information Technology: IT is especially important in a NewCo as the systems are essential to support all business functions, offer connectivity throughout the organization and increase accountability. A new IT leader should therefore be in place as soon as possible to make important system choices. Extracting IT systems from the parent company is complex, and outside spending on IT consulting and outsourced services can be costly. The IT leader should be particularly adept at keeping such outside spending under control.

Other considerations: Many experienced spin-off and carve- out CEOs say they would give more attention to investor relations and corporate communications if they had to do it all again. They underestimated the importance of having an expert who could skillfully communicate the company’s story and evolution while reaching out to both internal and external stakeholders. Additionally, they would appoint a talented project manager (PM) who reports directly to the CEO to help with every aspect of the execution during the transition. Whether pulled from the legacy business or from outside, ideal characteristics for a successful PM include strong communication skills and the ability to plan and execute in a very hands-on way.

04. Corporate culture

As the transition to a spin-off or carve-out will inevitably be a period of high uncertainty and heavy workloads, instilling employee confidence in the NewCo must be a top priority for every CEO and CHRO. A NewCo CEO inherits a group of employees with various attitudes towards the changes occurring and different levels of engagement in the new company. Often, the pace and business drivers of the NewCo are – by necessity – vastly different from those of the parent company. Setting and communicating a simple, compelling vision to employees on day one is essential to engaging the workforce, retaining top performers, and attracting new leaders to the organization.

The disruption caused by the transition to a NewCo also offers a unique opportunity to engage the organization in building a positive culture. Diversity, equity, and inclusion should be front and center in these discussions. Interestingly, most NewCo leaders find culture-setting in the newly established company easier than in any other CEO role or M&A environment. The reason? More often than not, employees are actively looking for new direction and support. Plus, the NewCo was purposefully created to set a different path than the parent company, making it easier to establish a culture that may be different from the legacy organization. At the heart of culture-building is communication. To succeed, just as with instilling employee confidence, leaders must keep their messages simple and reinforce those messages early and often.

Figure 3: Culture is key

05. Timeline

There are many moving parts involved in the launch of a NewCo. Leaders should find the right balance between focusing their energy on standing up the NewCo and driving future value. The illustrative timeline below (Figure 4) can provide guidance on when key decisions and milestones should occur, from pre-launch to growth.

Pre-launch. Ideally, the NewCo has a few months to put core leadership in place ahead of the These leaders include a CEO, CHRO, CFO, and the minimum number of board members needed to support the launch. Keeping the core team lean gives the company flexibility to bring on additional talent that will help the company evolve. Additionally, NewCo leaders should begin to identify, assess and focus on retaining key talent that was part of the parent company that is being spun-off or carved-out.

Setup. As essential functions are put in place and the NewCo is launched, the new company will communicate the vision, identify legacy talent they want to retain and promote, and round out the corporate leadership team.

Ramp up. With the new company moving towards independence, retention methods need to be put in place for key internal talent, as other legacy employees who wish to leave will likely start self-selecting To turn the company towards new growth and profit targets, it is also important to increase the focus on existing customers and connect with new ones.

Growth. As the NewCo approaches normalcy for a growing organization, the emphasis will shift from building the business to maintaining its core vision. At this point, leaders need to refine their talent strategy, develop benchmarks, bring on new board members, and start their succession planning process as the company increasingly looks to the future.

Figure 4: Illustrative timeline of operations and talent evolution

Spin-off and Carve-Out Success

A NewCo will face many challenges as it launches and develops. Setting one up is an inherently delicate task, requiring leaders to unravel and rebuild highly complex overhead infrastructures within compressed timeframes, and under the scrutiny of public markets or engaged investors. The leadership lessons Russell Reynolds Associates uncovered around five key topics – board, leadership attributes, underestimated functions, corporate culture, and timeline – can provide insights to business leaders to help them best navigate the intricacies of launching a spin-off or carve-out company.

Authors

Ernie Brittingham is a member of the firm’s healthcare sector and leads the global medical devices and diagnostics practice. He is also a member of the private equity and board & CEO advisory partners groups. Ernie is based in New York.
Sarah Flören is a member of the firm’s healthcare sector and leads strategic insight generation for the global medical devices and diagnostics practice. Sarah is based in New York.

References

1. Copp, Josh, et al. “Divestiture in Medtech: Are You the Natural Owner of Your Businesses?” McKinsey & Company
2. Cox, Dylan, and Wylie Fernyhough. “Q4 2020 PitchBook Analyst Note: 2021 US Private Equity Outlook: PitchBook
3. Herschman, Gary, et al. “Robust Health-Care M&A Volume Ends 2020, Will Continue in 2021 | Mergers, Acquisitions & Divestitures.” Epstein Becker & Green
4. CB Insights. “Healthcare Unicorn Exit Activity Reached Record Levels In 2020.” CB Insights Research
5. “Healthcare and Life Sciences Deal Activity Will Be Robust in 2021: KPMG Survey.” KPMG

Five Leadership Insights from the Healthcare Industry on Launching a NewCo

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices