Iman Al Qasim | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Great Leaders Serve Others

An interview with Iman Al Qasim, EVP of Human Capital at Emirates Global Aluminum‍

← Back to main page

While women are taking on more board roles across the Middle East, there is still a long way to go before women achieve equality in leadership. We speak to Iman Al Qasim, Executive Vice President Human Capital at Emirates Global Aluminium, the world’s largest ‘premium aluminium’ producer and the biggest industrial company in the UAE outside oil and gas, on the defining learnings that shaped her career.

In terms of overcoming the challenge of rising through the ranks as a woman, I think a lot of it comes down to confidence.

What one learning has had the biggest impact on your career?

To quote a VP of mine when I was working in a US company: “You are always teaching, and you are always learning.”

Even when you have reached a senior position, you should keep an open mind and continue to learn and grow. You can learn from anyone - from those older and wiser, to young children. I always aim to learn myself and foster a learning culture in my teams.

What drives you to succeed?

Having a clear purpose is so important. I believe that success should be an outcome of achieving an internal purpose and not a motivator in its own right. My goal is to make an impact on humanity and serve my country.

A good leader understands that their role is to enable others, and not an opportunity to sit at the top while others enable them.

What key drivers have enabled you to get to where you are today?

I have a huge passion for self-development and have always actively sought mentors and role models to coach me. It is important to recognize that you cannot achieve success in isolation; you need a support network.

What advice would you give to future female leaders or future women on boards?

I would say to take things step-by-step. When you start on your purpose, and if you believe you have the potential to serve at the top, it can seem overwhelming - especially for women, who can tend to say, “I can’t do it.” We all need to start somewhere. If you break the journey down into a manageable progression of milestones, it will seem more achievable.

In terms of overcoming the challenge of rising through the ranks as a woman, I think a lot of it comes down to confidence. I had the opportunity to develop the confidence muscle early on. I have had days where I had to go to the bathroom and cry, and then ask myself what I am going to do with that. I have had some defining moments where some very senior men have put me down – but I learned to put them in their place. The first time was very hard, but it gets easier and easier. Confidence is a muscle.

Can you describe some defining moments in your journey to success as a female leader?

The first one was a conversation I had with my father about whether I should pursue a career in the private sector or go into government. He encouraged me to go into the private sector, where you can learn so much so quickly, and then use that knowledge in a government role. After two or three years he suggested I had done enough in the private arena. But by that point, I knew I wanted to strive to reach the director level where I could really make an impact.

The second defining moment for me was an interaction with one of my Managing Directors early in my career. He was a very important person, but he was so humble and always made time to take my call. His desire to serve was apparent and it confirmed for me the essential truth that leadership should be about serving, rather than being served.

Iman Al Qasim is Executive Vice President Human Capital at Emirates Global Aluminium, the world’s largest ‘premium aluminium’ producer and the biggest industrial company in the UAE outside oil and gas. She has over 20 years of experience in industries including Finance, Energy, Automotive, and Retail and in both Government and multinational organisations. She serves as serves as a Board Member of Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre Group and United Printing and Publishing.

The interview was conducted by Mina Paul, Consultant at Russell Reynolds Associates, Dubai. Mina is passionate about building authentic and long-term partnerships with clients, teaming up with leadership teams to identify and attract diverse talents.

Read more interviews

Impactful Leaders Embrace Change

An interview with Edie Rodriguez – Board Member, Saudi Tourism Authority, Chair of NRC

Being a Leader, Not a Boss

Elissar Farah Antonios – CEO UAE and Head of MENA Cluster at Citi

Being a Confident Leader

An interview with Huda Allawati; Founder and CEO at Aliph Capital

Successful Leaders Do Not Do It Alone

An interview with Sharmila Murat – CIO, Chalhoub Group

Impactful Leaders Embrace Change

An interview with Edie Rodriguez – Board Member, Saudi Tourism Authority, Chair of NRC

Being a Leader, Not a Boss

Elissar Farah Antonios – CEO UAE and Head of MENA Cluster at Citi

Being a Confident Leader

An interview with Huda Allawati; Founder and CEO at Aliph Capital

Successful Leaders Do Not Do It Alone

An interview with Sharmila Murat – CIO, Chalhoub Group

We would love to partner with you

If you are a C-Suite Leader and/or Board Member and are interested in joining our women’s network, would like to partner with us, or speak to one of our experts, please fill in your details below.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices