From Risk Management to Risk Navigation: Why Strategic Risk Officers Have Never Been So Vital – Or So Challenged – in Financial Services | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

From Risk Management to Risk Navigation: Why Strategic Risk Officers Have Never Been So Vital – Or So Challenged – in Financial Services

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCulture RiskSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalVenture Capital and GrowthConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesFinTechGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementPrivate CreditInvestment ManagementReal EstateFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Article

+ 3 authors

November 27, 2025

11 min

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCulture RiskSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalVenture Capital and GrowthConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesFinTechGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementPrivate CreditInvestment ManagementReal EstateFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Discover why CROs now must strategically navigate risk, complexity, and disruption to build resilience and shape future growth.

Close

Amelia Stubbs

London

Ellen Yaffe

New York

Daria Rokk

Hong Kong

Shad Ngam

Melbourne

Ines Affolter

Zurich

Beijing Zhu

Hong Kong

The world has become considerably more volatile, uncertain, and interconnected. While this change has been accelerating for years, recent challenges have brought it into sharp focus.

As a result, the chief risk officer (CRO) role within financial services has expanded well beyond its traditional remit. CROs must understand all risks a firm is exposed to and work with others to ensure appropriate mitigation is in place.  The mandate has ballooned in the risks to be considered as CROs now advise broadly across a wider spectrum of issues—aligning closely with business growth while proactively managing downside risks.  This shift demands not only refining existing skills but cultivating new capabilities. This adaptive capacity to respond and evolve to new demands -- whilst maintaining a steadfast clarity of purpose – is now essential to the modern CRO mandate. Managing risk in today’s environment is not just a proactive response to volatility, but a strategic lever for growth, positioning the CRO as a key player in shaping the organization's future.

Today, CROs must possess a unique blend of commercial acumen, strategic foresight, stakeholder influence, and leadership agility, positioning them as critical counterbalances to the CEO. The most forward-looking organizations increasingly recognize that a strong CRO-CEO dynamic is not just a competitive advantage—it’s a necessity. Success hinges not only on selecting the right leader but empowering them effectively, carefully balancing authority with accountability, and influence with restraint. This must not be at the loss of an excellent relationship with the Board and in particular the Chair of Risk. CROs must balance being part an essential member of management with being a trusted advisor to the Board who also serve as the ultimate point of escalation.

Drawing on market observations, interviews, and a Russell Reynolds Associates survey conducted with leading CROs, we outline how top financial institutions are adapting to these realities and offer recommendations for navigating this evolving landscape.

The expanding CRO mandate

CROs are now responsible for driving strategic and operational resilience across the enterprise. In a recent RRA survey of CROs, “managing increased complexity and volatility” emerged as by far the most commonly cited challenge. This complexity and volatility stem from a multitude of factors, including:

Geopolitical and socioeconomic volatility

The global environment is more volatile than ever, with geopolitical tensions, trade wars, and civil unrest introducing significant risks and potential shocks. CROs are now focused on ensuring the organization is resilient to risks arising from international conflicts, shifting political alliances, and domestic polarization.  These are not just peripheral concerns—they are central to today’s risk landscape, requiring CROs to take a forward-looking, anticipatory approach that safeguards the organization’s long-term success.

Technological advancements, strategic disruption, and cyber threats

Technological innovation is fundamentally reshaping the financial services landscape. As one CRO we interviewed put it, “If technology is not central to your strategy, the firm will soon lack relevance.” Firms must be prepared to react to disruptive technologies that can rapidly alter their market position.

In financial services, both customer interface innovation and operational resilience are increasingly critical—not just for maintaining competitive advantage, but to meet rising regulatory and consumer expectations.

Technology also continues to create cyber and fraud risks. High-profile data breaches have demonstrated that cybersecurity is no longer just an IT issue—it is a broad strategic and reputational challenge that can affect every aspect of the organization.  This will be further compounded by AI’s advancement and the continued systems integration within companies and across contracting parties. Similarly, financial crime remains at the forefront of risk concerns, requiring CROs to be forward-thinking and adaptive to ensure their organizations are not only protected but resilient.

Regulatory change

As regulatory requirements evolve across financial services, CROs face increasing pressure to ensure compliance across multiple jurisdictions and complex regulatory frameworks. Boards and regulators expect CROs to not only manage risks, but also provide assurance that the organization is adhering to evolving standards. This has placed CROs in the spotlight, where their ability to navigate regulatory demands is critical to maintaining the organization’s reputation and operational license.

Influx of private capital

Another key factor fundamentally reshaping the financial services industry—and the broader economy—is the influx of private capital into markets once dominated by public investments. This shift is altering systemic risk by changing the financial underpinning of the economy and the flow of capital. CROs are developing more nuanced models that account for these new dynamics in response to regulatory scrutiny and risk management concerns. Given the scale of the sector and the variance of risk management maturity across private capital firms, concentration risk could become a major trigger in a future financial crisis.

Rising cost pressures

Simultaneously, CROs are tasked with managing regulatory requirements while also addressing intense cost pressures. “Doing more with less” is a recurring theme, as risk functions are expected to enhance efficiency without compromising effectiveness. CROs must find innovative ways to streamline processes, leverage technology, and transform their risk functions to deliver more value while controlling costs.

Expanding stakeholder expectations

As a result of the factors above, the expectations placed on CROs by boards, governments, regulators, investors, and the public have reached, and will stay at levels far higher than previously experienced.  Indeed, CROs are now increasingly required to have an external presence and to engage with investors, broader government officials and consumer advocates.   CROs must now manage the demands of multiple stakeholders, each with distinct priorities. This requires the ability to navigate complex stakeholder landscapes with diplomacy, tact, and credibility. The CRO role demands both partnership and challenge— balancing the paradox of ensuring transparent, productive communication while also being able to "hold the line" when necessary.

The evolving capabilities of the modern CRO

Financial institutions have already come a long way from relying on the risk technicians of the past, but the stakes - and expectations - of risk leadership have never been higher. The role of the CRO has transformed, and with it, the skill set required to succeed.

Today's financial services CROs must possess a unique combination and balance of capabilities. Below are the most frequently cited capabilities required of CROs, ranked by how often they are mentioned in our discussions with boards, risk executives and their ExCo peers:

Enterprise strategist

Strategically aligns risk management with enterprise-wide objectives at the right time for the organisation and its culture.  Pragmatic, commercially aware, and able to integrate risk thinking seamlessly to drive growth without stifling innovation.

Adaptive and agile leader

Rapidly identifies, understands, and adapts to emerging interconnected risks. Translates complexity into practical actions, staying ahead in a fast-changing environment.

Transformation catalyst

Drives continuous evolution of the risk function and wider organization. Optimizes structures and processes, embedding risk management to support resilience, innovation, and strategic growth.

Relationship cultivator

Builds credible, trusted relationships with diverse stakeholders, leveraging sophisticated influencing and stakeholder management skills to clearly communicate risk insights and priorities. Balances collaboration with independent judgment, effectively navigating tensions, constructively challenging when necessary, and championing organizational protection and strategic alignment.

External voice and advocate

Serves as a credible external voice for the organization, effectively communicating its risk strategy and resilience to key stakeholders. Actively listens to external perspectives, engages thoughtfully, and influences stakeholder groups.

Balanced commercial integrator

Aligns risk management with commercial objectives. Anticipates threats and opportunities, ensuring short-term protection and long-term competitive advantage.

Systems architect

Designs and maintains efficient information flows and risk oversight systems. Empowers business units to proactively self-manage risks, enhancing transparency and strategic effectiveness.

Talent cultivator and magnet

Can assemble and work effectively with “expert teams”, directly and through influence, to bring the right expertise to the table. Attracts and develops future risk leaders, fostering team cohesion and continuous learning. Builds teams capable of navigating complexity and sustaining high performance.

Technology champion

Strategically leverages cutting-edge technology, data analytics, and real-time monitoring. Proactively prepares the organization for the rapidly evolving AI landscape—addressing new risks and opportunities AI introduces—and actively invests in upskilling talent across the risk function and broader organization to effectively deploy and manage AI-driven tools. Enhances efficiency, innovation, and proactive risk management across the enterprise.

Calm under pressure

Provides calm, steady guidance even under pressure. Demonstrates resilience, clarity, and decisive leadership, navigating uncertainty effectively when stakes are highest.

A challenging risk talent landscape for organizations

Many leading financial institutions have recognized the need for strategic CROs and are taking steps to upskill their risk leadership and capabilities more broadly. Investments in advanced risk management technologies, such as AI and real-time monitoring tools, are also enhancing risk understanding and effectiveness. However, challenges remain.

Limited talent pool

Despite these efforts, strategic risk leaders remain hard to come by. While some organizations value the development of risk talent and are looking at their talent needs holistically across businesses and functions, many are not valuing the importance of risk and the development of bench strength to meet the growing demands of the role. As a result, talented individuals become frustrated and CROs are more likely drawn into day-to-day operations, limiting their ability to focus on broader, strategic issues or cultivate external relationships and viewpoints.

Cultural misalignment

Cultural misalignment is a significant barrier to effective risk management within organizations. Investments in technology and talent are often undermined by other priorities or a lack of a strong risk culture. Without the right focus, leadership, and cultural foundation, even the most advanced tools and systems will fail to deliver their intended potential.

Moving from simply managing risk to deftly navigating it

Move beyond risk maturity to strategic assessment

With the pace of change accelerating, CROs are guiding their organisations from more traditional risk maturity calibration to real-time strategic assessment.  This goes beyond the risk function—it requires a holistic understanding of the approach and talent needed for the future, while effectively balancing current and future agendas of the business. Many organizations are not where they would like (or need) to be when it comes to managing risk because the business environment is constantly evolving.

Develop a forward-looking view on risk talent

Organizations should adapt their talent assessment models to evaluate both technical expertise as well as the strategic, cultural, stakeholder and leadership qualities necessary to drive effective risk management. Traits such as intellectual curiosity and learning agility are particularly important for CROs. While technical expertise remains important, most organizations now recognize that broader leadership capabilities are equally—if not more—important when selecting a CRO.

The CRO is one of the most impactful and challenging roles within the C-suite; as such, organizations should introduce an additional layer of insight around potential CRO candidates – in particular, self-knowledge, values & aspirations, and wider impact & legacy. As the speed of change accelerates and the leadership context becomes increasingly complex, it is no longer sufficient to look at an executive’s readiness for the CRO role in the short term. Instead, organizations need to understand a leader’s ability to adapt, flex, and grow with the role.

Start early with CRO succession planning

Organizations must proactively prioritize CRO succession planning. Identifying and developing future CROs well in advance ensures leadership continuity and resilience within the risk function. It’s never too early to start planning for your next CRO. Effective succession planning goes beyond identifying a single successor—it requires establishing structured guidelines, search processes, training programs, mentorship frameworks, and ongoing talent monitoring to build a sustainable pipeline of future risk leaders.

Targeted development programs tailored to the unique demands of the CRO role are essential. These programs should focus on building the specific leadership muscles required to navigate the complexities of modern risk management while ensuring alignment with the broader business ecosystem in which a CRO must operate.

Build a proactive, enterprise-wide risk culture

Cultivating a culture that enables the right risk/reward balance for your entity is an enterprise-wide responsibility—not just the domain of the risk function. Organizations must embed risk awareness at all levels, ensuring that appropriate considerations are woven into decision-making processes across board, leadership and business.

Over-reliance on a single individual—such as the CRO—creates risk in itself. Instead, organizations should foster a culture where risk is understood, owned, and actively managed across all business functions.

Navigating a disrupted world: The new paradigm for identifying CROs

The rapidly evolving remit of the CRO has transformed it into one of the most dynamic and challenging roles in today's C-suite, shifting from helping organisations understand and manage risks to strategically navigating complexities and leveraging uncertainty for innovation and growth. Leading CROs now operate at the intersection of risk and opportunity, serving as strategic architects driving organizational resilience, transformation, and competitive advantage. To fully harness this potential, organizations must position the CRO function as a critical incubator for enterprise-wide learning and leadership development, empowering bold, strategic leaders who will guide the most resilient and high-performing enterprises of tomorrow.

Critical Questions for Leaders: How Prepared is Your Organization to Navigate Uncertainty?

Does the board, business and the leadership understand and effectively manage its traditional versus emerging risks? How forward looking is the approach?

How effective is the culture, leadership and systems in ensuring a balanced approach to understanding and driving risk vs reward decisions?

Is the CRO role and/or the risk function valued as a strategic thought partner and considered effective in providing risk clarity and insight – if not, why not?

How well prepared are you for the paucity of talent in risk management (and across the control landscape more broadly)? How well does the organization understand, develop and foster its potential risk talent, both internally and externally?

How effectively is the organization anticipating and planning for the impact of AI on the business and risk landscape—and what actions are being taken to develop the necessary judgment, skills, and capabilities across leadership and teams?

RRA’s Risk, Compliance, Regulation and Control offering is designed to help you navigate an increasingly disrupted world

Wherever you are on your journey, our expertise in Risk, Compliance, Regulation and Control Leadership ensures we can help you achieve you achieve your desired outcome…

Authors

Amelia Stubbs leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ global Risk, Compliance, Regulation and Control practice. She is based in London.

Beijing Zhu is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. She is based in Hong Kong.

Daria Rokk leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Risk, Compliance, Regulation and Control practice in Asia Pacific. She is based in Hong Kong.

Ellen Yaffe leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Risk, Compliance, Regulation and Control practice in the Americas. She is based in New York.

Ines Affolter is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services and Risk, Compliance, Regulation and Control practice. She is based in Zurich.

Shad Ngam is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services and Risk, Compliance, Regulation and Control practice. He is based in Sydney.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices