CHRO Radar: The View from Southeast Asia | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CHRO Radar: The View from Southeast Asia

Conversation with Michelle Chan Crouse, Leadership Advisor at RRA.

CONNECT WITH OUR EXPERTS

Across the world, business leaders are increasingly concerned with ensuring they have the right expertise to drive their organizations forward. Our most recent Global Leadership Monitor (H2 2024) reveals that 57% of global business leaders see the availability of key talent/skills as one of the top five greatest threats to their business in the next 12 to 18 months. It’s perhaps one reason why CHRO turnover has declined globally over the past year.

Clearly, organizations are relying more than ever on their CHROs—and prizing experienced leaders to navigate an increasingly uncertain operating environment.

But do these global trends reflect what’s happening in Singapore and ASEAN? How does the situation differ, and why? To get the local context, we sat down with Russell Reynolds Associates’ Michelle Chan Crouse.

Michelle, what’s the CHRO talent pool like in Singapore and ASEAN right now?

Both across ASEAN and in Singapore there’s a large pool of talent.  The most senior HR talent consists of  CHROs for local conglomerates and large regional CHROs of MNC’s. The regional CHROs many times have a larger remit, both in terms of people and revenue. But they can sometimes be more focused on execution of a strategy that their global HQ has set. They will have to tailor the global strategy for the region, then execute it.  They’re typically pragmatic and great executors—they get things done.

The CHROs, of the local conglomerates on the other hand, have to work more closely with the board and the CEO. And because they’re actively involved in setting the overall people strategy, they have to be more strategic and commercially-minded. They are still pragmatic and able to get things done, just like their regional counterparts, but they generally span broader assuming the HR function is sophisticated and a true business partner to the CEO and board.

And how is the CHRO talent pool different in Singapore and ASEAN?

Typically, the talent pool here needs to cover many different markets: Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and the Philippines. So they’re very adept at dealing with complexity and inclusive culture. They also excel at relationship-building and influencing, because they need to be good at building bridges to execute quickly. And they need to be good at managing complexity, because some markets in this region move at a much faster pace. So you have to learn how to prioritize across different markets and think about what’s going to make the most impact.

Does that mean there’s a greater demand for experienced CHROs here, versus first-timers?

Yes. The CHROs here tend to be more experienced, because you really need to have lived here to understand how to build relationships. So generally, they’ve either spent time living and working here as part of their rotation. Or they’ve covered this part of the world for a while, so they have some understanding of the culture. As such,  they tend to have seen more and done more by the time they reach CHRO level.

What other qualities does the ideal CHRO need to have to succeed in ASEAN?

One key thing is that we experience a higher degree of volatility and change, compared to other parts of the world—natural disasters, regime changes, and pandemics. So you need a CHRO who’s highly resilient, agile, and able to adapt very quickly.

Another thing is, with growth in China starting to slow, everyone is looking to Southeast Asia for growth. That means you need a CHRO who is very commercially-minded and can work with your business leaders to translate your business strategy into a people strategy that enables you to deliver that growth. It’s not enough to be a ‘people person.’ You need to have a brain for business and be able to speak the same business language as the board and the CEO.

In the past, when things were more stable, CHROs could just keep their heads down and focus on execution. But now they’ve got to be more strategic and commercially savvy.

And how easy is it to find a CHRO like that?

We have lots of CHROs who fit into that pragmatic, execution-minded category. But commercially-minded and strategic CHROs are harder to come by. They do exist, they are out there. But there’s definitely a skill gap there.

But the other thing is that some of those regional layers of HR are disappearing, due to cost-cutting. Teams are getting leaner. So often, you’ll find that your regional HR leaders have to wear two or three different hats. For example, they may also be Head of Talent or Performance as well as HRBP. They can’t do it all. So again, that ability to prioritize and think strategically becomes even more important.

What can organizations to do address that skill gap?

It comes back to that age old question: build versus buy. Obviously, you have to build your own talent. But you also have to think about where your business is going to be and what the market is going to look like five years from now. For example, AI is a big trend at the moment, so you’re going to need HR business partners who understand what impact this technology is going to have on your future workforce. And that means you need to think slightly differently about your ‘build’ strategy.

Then, you need to ask yourself whether you have the right talent to build out those skills, or whether you will need to bring in new talent in from outside your region or market. That’s the ‘buy’ part.

But  I think there’s a third element too: build versus buy versus ‘bot’. And this third element is about asking yourself what tasks can be done or delivered by AI? How can you use AI to take care of low-value tasks (like data collection, for example) in order to free up your people to spend more time and energy doing higher-value, more strategic activities.

Finally, what can organizations do to help attract the top CHRO talent?

The top talent want to work in a place where they feel they can make a real impact—in an organization that takes HR seriously, where they know they’ll have a seat at the top table and have the chance to contribute to the business strategy. That’s the first thing.

The second thing is purpose. You need to have a strong employee value proposition. People want to feel like they’re making a positive difference in the world in general.

But I think the most important thing for a CHRO is really that relationship with the business leader. They have to feel like they’re going to make a great team together and be able to deliver meaningful change.

Authors

Michelle Chan is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Sector and lead for Human Resources Practices in Asia.

Sources

1 RRA Global Leadership Monitor – H2 2024
2 RRA Global CHRO Turnover Index

CHRO Radar: The View from Asia Pacific

Explore more

Speak to a consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices