7 Simple Tips and Reminders for Successful Video Interviewing During Today’s Crisis | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

7 Simple Tips and Reminders for Successful Video Interviewing During Today’s Crisis

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsHuman Resources OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

Article

March 18, 2020

2 min

Career AdviceCareer TransitionsHuman Resources OfficersExecutive SearchDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

To conduct a successful video interview, make sure you make proper eye contact, exhibit proper body language and minimize all outside distractions.

Close

For many good reasons organizations and candidates have a preference for meeting and interviewing in-person. As many organizations reduce travel and restrict visitors to their offices amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, the temptation may be to reschedule those in-person meetings. We strongly advise that organizations focus instead on shifting to virtual interviews. This will ensure candidate engagement, keep momentum in the process, and display an agility the candidate will appreciate and, frankly, expect in their future employer.

Use our 7 simple tips and reminders to run successful video-based interviews:

Test your technology in advance

Make sure you have your relevant web or video conferencing platform fully set up. Ensure you know how to login. Test whether the audio quality is better using voice over IP or your cell phone or land line. Reach out to the candidate in advance to make sure the application functions effectively on their device. Also, be patient, understanding that many platforms (internet providers and video technology) will be hosting unprecedented volumes and connections. If the video platform is not working effectively make the decision swiftly to move to a traditional phone call to fully capitalize on the time you have together.

Setup your space appropriately

Your space and lighting will both make an impression on the other end. Be sure to test how well-lit you are and what the background looks like in advance. Most platforms include a feature to see your own video feed.

How your camera is positioned relative to your face will make a big difference to the experience on the other end. This is particularly important if you have multiple monitors. You may be looking at the feed of the candidate but in doing so end up looking like you are looking away from them if the camera is positioned over a different monitor. Make sure your camera is positioned facing you and look at it to make eye contact.

Be mindful of body language

Not being physically in the same room, one is liable to be a bit more casual; additionally, if you are using a small device like a tablet, phone, or laptop with integrated camera there is the risk that you end up hunching over the device. Sit tall, shoulders back – like grandma and grandpa always said. Set up your device accordingly.

Minimize distractions

Ditch the other devices! It’s pretty rude to look at your phone or other device during an inperson meeting; just because the other party can’t see that device doesn’t make it okay. The research on multitasking is pretty cut and dry – no one is good at it. The party on the other end will notice if you aren’t fully engaged with them.

Amp up your enthusiasm

It can be easy to slip into monotone when speaking on the phone, and a less than perfectly clear connection may do you no favors either. Express yourself enthusiastically and vary your intonation and pace according to the points you are communicating. Remember you also have video so don’t shy away from making non-verbal gestures (just don’t overdo it!).

Relax and set a good tone from the outset

We’d advise that on some of the finer points, like lighting and clutter-free spaces, you cut your candidates (and yourself) some slack. They may well be managing some complex arrangements. Making them feel comfortable regardless of the logistics you or they are trying to manage will set you up for a great conversation.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices