Interview with Bank of America Chairman Chad Holliday | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Bank of America Chairman Chad Holliday

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 15, 2022

15 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Bank of America’s Chairman discusses the critical roles of the chairman, the board and the CEO as they shape
strategy, plan succession and interact with stakeholders across the globe.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

Roger Crockett: I’d like to start off talking about the short-term versus the long term. Effective leadership
means balancing short-term growth with longer-term responsibility. With management
teams so focused on the short-term, how do you help boards strike a balance between
that short-term growth and the longer term?

Chad Holliday: That’s a great question. I think a board should spend more time on the longer-term issues facing
the enterprise where management is going to spend more time on the shorter-term issues, and
I think that’s a natural break and sometimes you have to actually say, ‘we’re only going to talk
about something five years out.’ We’re not going to talk about the current thing. You have to
put in restrictions so people really do focus on what’s critical long-term.

When I serve on a public company board, I call the CEO frequently just to talk to him – to have
maybe a ten minute conversation. Generally, when I call the first thing they want to tell me is
how the quarter is going and I say, ‘I really don’t care how the quarter is going. I want you to
focus on that. I want you to look at those people issues that are critical and make sure that
you have the right people and succession plan – that you’re bringing the right products to your
product line. That will make this company successful longer-term, ensuring that you’ve got the
right standards around compliance in place. So I think a board will focus more on those longerterm things. Just because they cannot be up with the pulse of the company every day doesn’t
mean the quarterly is also not important. But I think what the board brings is a sway--there are
a lot of things that pull a CEO short-term and I think the board needs to bring that balance to
what’s going on.

Roger Crockett: Excellent. And particularly that relationship between the non-executive chairman and that
CEO can help sort of refine that balance?

Chad Holliday: Yeah. So I think when I talk to a CEO about what he or she is going to say to the board – I say,
‘why don’t you tell me what you’re going to talk about?’ And inevitably they’ll have talked more
in that short-term because that’s the world they’re living in every day. I say, ‘well why don’t you
shift it? Talk about the short-term some but also talk about the one or two things that are critical
for the long-term. At Royal Dutch Shell where I serve on the board, we had a meeting recently
where we could only talk beyond 25 years.

And it was a requirement. That was very new for me. I’ve never had that kind of experience, but
I think it was very valuable to start really looking at whether we will have electric cars or will we
still have the internal combustion engine 25 years from now? That’s an important question

So I think the long-term is critical. Maybe it’s not 25 years for most companies, but longer-term
and to ensure you take time to do that right.

Roger Crockett: Right. And maybe you have some sort of definition of what longer-term means?

Chad Holliday: I find from my experience in Asia that you better ask what long-term and short-term is. I was
meeting with a premiere of China to ask him a question about when something would happen,
and he said soon. I said, ‘well, how soon?’ He said ‘very soon… ‘in twenty years.’ So, I think
cultures see time frames very differently. Asian cultures, from my experience, see it in a much
longer time frame than we would in the U.S. So it’s important to understand what that means
and what’s important for what you’re doing.

Roger Crockett: Let me point you to one thing that all boards make a priority for longer-term planning and
that is succession planning. How did you approach succession planning at DuPont where
you were previously CEO?

Chad Holliday: So I became CEO at 49. So the assumption of the board was that I might be there a few years.
So I’d say in the first three or four years we didn’t focus on that as much and then after about
three or four years, the board insisted that we had a pipeline of between 15 and 20 people
that they wanted to keep their eye on, some of them very young that would need several more
experiences before they’d be ready to be CEO. And we exposed the board to those people in
multiple ways. Then after I had been in the role for about eight years, it was obviously a point in
time when the board started planning on my succession. We narrowed it down to five that we
thought were critical and they were ranked. They were ranked in age, they were ranked in skills
and capabilities and we found ways for the board to really get to know those people well.

Roger Crockett: It was a woman that succeeded you at DuPont and there are all too few women in CEO
positions. How much thought should be given to that?

Chad Holliday: Well, I think we’re missing a great opportunity for not using the whole workforce more completely
and women are a great example of that. Still women make up just 15% of corporate boards
today, and I think less than 5% of the CEO’s of major companies. It’s almost embarrassing that
we’re not using this potential.

So you just got to break down the barriers to that. I think we did a nice job of that in DuPont of
developing women in general, and then we had one that made it all the way to CEO.

So many chief executives are contemplating roles as non-executive directors on publicly traded
boards. You have had the opportunity to sit on both sides of the fence as a CEO, and as a nonexecutive chairman in your case. So if you had a private moment with someone and you could
share candid guidance, experience, what would you share?

Do your homework. Interview a number of members of the board that is approaching you, and
pick some people on the board you’d like to talk to not just the ones that would like to talk to
you. Spend time with the general counsel. Spend time with the Chief Financial Officer. It’s
really important, even if you offend people a bit, to do your homework, and do not apologize for
taking plenty of time to do your homework because you’re making a long-term commitment. You
don’t need to plan on being a board member two or three years. You need to be on a board
five to 10 years so you understand what it is. So, it’s a big commitment on your time and a big
commitment to them. So be sure you’ve done your homework well.

Roger Crockett: Well what about if you are a sitting CEO – you’re currently managing a company and then
you also look into opportunities to be a non-executive director on a board. Can that be
done effectively, ethically and all the rest?

Chad Holliday: So here’s the Chad Holliday cookbook. If you follow the recipe, the answer would be the first
year, no. You need to understand your job. And sometime after the first year you might join one
board, and I would have a max of one. That can be very valuable. It needs to be selected so you
will learn something from that. You’re really going to bring some perspectives back to your board
from that experience. And also it should not be too time consuming. So look at the very practical
things. Where is it located? How much travel time do you have? You know, how often do they
meet? It sounds like a cookbook and it is, but I think those are very practical things to take into
account because once you sign on for that board you need to be with it.

I’ve had the honor of serving on eight public company boards and I find each one is very different.
The culture is different. So my advice would be, be sure you’re comfortable with the ethics, the
form of business, the way that company does it’s business. Because if you’re uncomfortable with
that, it’s going to be a very difficult time. I serve on the board of Royal Dutch Shell, and of course
the European system is very different.

But what I find is the pattern there is a non-executive chair who has been a CEO of a large
company, but from a different industry. I think that actually serves very well in Europe.

Roger Crockett: And how much time do you spend with the CEO in this role?

Chad Holliday: In the European system, it’s about half-time. So if you want a frame of reference, if you’re talking
to someone about being a non-executive chair of a major European company, you’re talking
about roughly three days a week commitment to that. The U.S. system is quite different. Eightyfive percent or so of the companies don’t have a separate chair. The CEO also serves as chair.

I find you have to work out the system that works best in your situation. At Bank of America,
Brian (CEO Brian Moynihan) and I talk about once a week. We talk about things he mainly wants
to talk about, and then we strategize together on what the board should be doing and how we
get information to the board and how we get input from the board.

Roger Crockett: Chad, in this day and age, when there is a great deal of scrutiny on publicly traded
companies by regulatory boards, by shareholders, what are the hot button issues that you
think boards should really be paying attention to and making a priority?

Chad Holliday: So boards are elected by the shareholders but they must serve all the stakeholders. I think boards
need to spend more time understanding what the issues are outside just what the shareholder
issues are. And so, spend time with the regulators that control your industry and listen to them--
not when there’s a problem, but when there’s not a problem so you can understand what’s going
on. At Royal Dutch Shell I serve as the Chair of the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee
and so we deal with environment and safety and government relations. So we have an investor
meeting once a year just to talk about those issues. So the CEO and I share that committee.
We come and we listen to investors who have those kind of questions. And so I think it’s very
important that you understand the unique questions there and don’t just fall in this pattern of
communicating to all investors the same way.

Roger Crockett: Well, of course, one hot button issue that everyone cares about is, of course,
compensation. Often times, CEO compensation especially is deserved and certainly you
need to pay a certain compensation in order to be competitive. But how do you strike
the balance between what’s deserved, what’s competitive and this notion of perceived
overpayment of executives?

Chad Holliday: Every job is a competitive situation. So I don’t care whether it’s the operator on the floor of
a DuPont plant or it’s the teller at a Bank of America location or it’s the CEO of one of those
respective firms, you have to look at what the market is paying because you have got to attract
competitive people and be able to maintain those in your company. So you’re going to have to
pay medium or higher if you want to keep the best people. So I don’t apologize at all for paying
what we have to, to get the CEO, CFO or any other key position in the company.

The market is going to dictate what that is. I don’t care if you’re in the United States or you’re
in Japan, it’s going to be the market. So you have to design your systems accordingly and I
wouldn’t apologize for that. Now do I think CEO pay is too high in the U.S.? Yes, I think it’s too
high. I think it’s very hard to rationalize the value contribution as that big, but if that’s what the
market says, that’s what we have to pay. Likewise, if the market goes down, we pay less.

And so I think it’s very important you bring it down and particularly for the CEO. At DuPont, we
had a system where the CEO had to be paid within a range or multiple of the next highest level
group of executives. So we were going to purposely make sure it did not skyrocket out of the
way. I think that was a good plan but if that did not allow us to attract a competitive CEO, you’d
have to change the policy.

Roger Crockett: And maybe some of the issue has to do with bonuses, right? There is salary, there are
bonuses and stock options and maybe the challenge is trying to make sure that you get the
right equation of that mix.

Chad Holliday: Yeah, I think you’re exactly right. Generally the salaries are justified.

It’s the bonuses. If the bonuses are just on some formula that maybe the CEO contributed to,
maybe they didn’t, that’s more questionable. If the CEO has specific objectives that he or she is
going to deliver to the company and they are accomplished and they delivered the results that are
anticipated, the CEO should be rewarded for that.

If the company did great but the CEO didn’t do their individual objectives, the CEO should pay the
price for that. So I think it means a compensation committee and the board must really work to
set those objectives, make them measurable and quantitative.

Roger Crockett: Let’s turn now to transparency at the company. With new regulations about being
transparent at publicly traded companies the dynamic between the board and shareholders
has grown far more nuanced. How does this change the way companies do their
business?

Chad Holliday: Well, I don’t think we should have more annual meetings.If I look at activist shareholders, they
take two different forms. They take the form of someone who is trying to create more value in
the stock price, either short or long term because they do not like what the company is doing.
A second group of shareholders are special interest groups. You must be very careful, as a
board, not to let the special interest group influence you too much. You need to listen to their
concern, but as a board, you have to put that in balance with all the other concerns of the other
shareholders and other stakeholders of the company. So the secret is get a diverse board with a
lot of different perspectives that’s listening to those outside groups and ensure they come to the
meeting. Equally important is a management team that’s doing that because a management team
is really closer to it than the board is.

When one of these special interest groups came forward in my time at DuPont, we listened to
them. And many times, I sat down with them personally if I thought it was appropriate. If not, I’d
make sure the most appropriate person was. So I think it is very important to listen and really try
to understand and don’t just assume that they’re narrow in their views. Because many times they
have some ideas that you’ve missed along the way.

Roger Crockett: Chad, in your experience living in Asia for six years and managing over on that side of the
world, what leadership lessons can you share with us about managing and leadership?

Chad Holliday: We could take the rest of the day on that but let me just share a few I think might be useful.
When I got to Asia, we had 15 country presidents and they were all Western -- either American
or European. I determined very quickly we were not going to win in those countries if you had to
have an interpreter for everything. So our goal was to develop local talent who could take over
those jobs. I was very proud by the time I left. We had 15 country presidents – they were all
locals of the country they were in, and what we found is then you could understand the customer
needs. You could relate to the employees. That’s critical. You also have to give those country
presidents the freedom to go do the job. It’s very important. If you try to make everything be
translated through so it makes sense to an American you won’t get the job done.

Roger Crockett: Would you recommend that for most leaders? If you’re going to be the leader of a
company and if not that the leader of a division or a business, is it important to go out and
get global experience to understand different cultures in order to effectively lead a broad
team?

Chad Holliday: Yeah, it’s very important and it’s not going take a two-week trip with a stay at five star hotels.

It’s going out and living in those places and understanding what it’s really like to do business
there. It’s only by being there and living there and experiencing the country that you develop that.
Now you can’t go live in every country but I think it’s really critical for a chief executive today to
have had experience in a developing country. So I don’t mean going to Canada. I don’t mean
go live in London. I mean live in these situations where the real growth is going to be because
the growth is going to be in some of these other countries and you’ve got to understand what
practical reality is there.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices