“The Customer-First Organization”: Organizational Structure | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

“The Customer-First Organization”: Organizational Structure

Technology and InnovationCustomer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCustomer Activation and Growth

Article

Sean Roberts

July 21, 2020

5 min

Technology and InnovationCustomer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCustomer Activation and Growth

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The most advanced companies are developing platform offerings, becoming convenors of eco-systems and gaining invaluable insights in doing so.

Close

Sean Roberts

London

Adapting to constant innovation and transformation has become the only way to compete in rapidly disrupting markets

Every company must think and act like a technology company to remain relevant in the current competitive landscape.

We are in the age of the empowered customer. In both B2C and B2B alike, the customer is more empowered than ever before, with more data (both performance and social) to support their decision making, and lower barriers to switching loyalties. For leaders, this has created an imperative to structure and build organizations which can listen to customers and respond at speed. The cost of inaction is irrelevance.

Technology has become central to remaining competitive, both to enable the iterative cycles required to constantly optimize products, and as a stimulus for demand. In both our client interactions and in conversations with top product leaders, we’ve seen a rising need for chief product officers (CPOs) who are tech savvy, commercial and customer-focused.

The most advanced companies are developing platform offerings, becoming convenors of eco-systems and gaining invaluable insights in doing so. The product function has been at the eye of this storm, accelerating new approaches to the market and lubricating customer-focused conversations across diverse functions, from marketing and technology to the lines of business. As a result, product has been given an increasingly loud voice with a seat at the top table, and the remit to actively drive change and revenue growth. In building product functions, companies are creating a stabilising connective tissue between technology and the customer, allowing them to create new digital propositions, ways of working and to develop partnerships with technology organizations to broaden their reach.

How do other functions adapt to the creation of a product function?

Organizations need to think holistically about their structure before building a product function

The product function can play a central role in organization-wide transitions to agile and engineering methodologies. It is well-placed to act as diplomat, functioning as the glue that attaches engineering mindsets to the strategic aims of the company and translates end solutions into customer messages. Due to the connected nature of this role, product functions should sit alongside technology and marketing rather than reporting into either function. Two distinct partnerships are then formed with these functions:

The Marketing relationship is built around how Marketing and Product can partner in ‘nudging’ customers and activating customer behaviour towards in-product discovery.

The Technology relationship should have a healthy, fraternal tension. Product pushes technology for delivery and results, and to develop new initiatives rather than defaulting to a focus on feasibility.

"Product exists to translate the needs of the business into software engineering specifications, and has evolved to sit at the interface of Business, Design, Engineering, and the Customer – meaning fundamental changes to the organization structure will be needed.

-Kriti Sharma

How do you bring the customer to the centre of the organization, and what does that really mean?

The product function should know the ‘why’ better than the CEO. The CEO will push for more features and bigger impact, but the product function will know the business case for it, what drives the customer interaction, and the data behind it all. The best product leaders will prioritise, deciding what must be built, what they would like to build, and what can they build that will surprise the customer. The customer is brought to the centre because product sits at the interface between building the solutions and getting them out to market.

Structures are then built around engaging the customer and metrics built to track this. These metrics usually consist of adoption of the product and engagement with the product, but the real success should also be measured by action-based follow-on activity. In other words, it’s fantastic that the customer is using feature one, but how long until they use feature two and three? Onboarding the customer in the first place, and then tracking in-product discovery is key to perfecting the customer journey.

"First of all, Agile is a capability, it is not a strategy. Organizations try to adopt Agile but this will not answer all problems. It is a capability, and a very valuable one which has immediate operational benefits, but one that cannot permanently affect a firm’s competitive position unless there is a strategy behind it that helps the team take the right decisions at the right time to direct that capability."

-Tanya Cordrey

"Product is the connective tissue; as a leader in product, your own team may not necessarily report to you, the designers may not report to you, etc… you have to learn to get creative when managing that, and to collaborate even more widely."

-Martin Eriksson

Customer centricity: balancing data and intuition to drive results for the customer

Speed to innovate, speed to react, and ultimately speed to market are core drivers of the product function. You can build in data capture mechanics at conception to create a live feedback loop, from which iterative processes are dynamically developed. However this would be only one part of the picture and, as such, the product function should work in close partnership with their stakeholders – often the business unit, the technology function for engineering and product design, and the marketing and go-to-market teams to help create an informed view of the bigger picture.

"The product role is a nexus between technology, business, storytelling, and design – with strong leadership capability surrounding them."

-Johannes Bruder

Many are taking a two-tacked approach by balancing a purely machine-centric approach to building a product and then iterating with a more human one. Hiring a series of PhD scientists can only get you so far before product talent needs to translate the findings into what they believe the customer may want – using a sort of ‘Product intuition’. Because of this, the best product talent will occasionally step over traditional go-to-market channels and speak for the customer themselves.

"Product ‘intuition’ is very important – the art is to balance 1) the data, with 2) where the market is going, and with 3) what the customer will want."

-Kriti Sharma

Framework for discussion

The ideal product leader comes in different varieties depending on your business, your strategy, and the maturity of your product function. The following set of diagnostic questions can help inform and frame your thinking around the most appropriate talent for your needs.

Current situation

Is the product new to the market?

Is there product buy-in from the top team?

Is product development core to the business strategy?

Who does the product function report to?

Current capability

How sophisticated is the product function?

What are the processes/structure in place – e.g. waterfall, agile, full-stack tribes and squads?

Is the product team aligned to the business strategy?

Is there a talent pipeline for the product function? Is the Product leader engaged in succession planning?

Strategy

Transform, grow, or innovate?

Are you looking to attract product talent with a new leader?

Are you looking to attract investment?

Are you looking to extend or consolidate your existing product portfolio?

Are you looking to reposition your existing products?

Growth through M&A and inorganic growth, or by farming the existing products?

Authors

Veena Marr is a member of the firm’s Global Technology Sector and Customer Activation and Growth Practice. Based in London, Veena leverages a digital and legal background to guide clients through times of transformation, expansion and innovation. Veena brings her extensive experience in partnering with Product functions to help clients assess, develop and hire exceptional Product leaders.
Sean Roberts is a member of the Technology Sector and is responsible for the Technology team in London. With a focus on fast moving technologies including Cloud, Security, Data and AI, and with expertise in Software, Connectivity and Business and Professional Services, Sean advises, recruits and helps develop outstanding leaders for companies in growth and transformation.
George Head is a Knowledge Associate for the Technology Officers Practice, based in London. Working broadly across the technology sector, George is focused on identifying emerging trends and codifying the priorities outlined by our clients.

PARTICIPANTS

We would like to thank all of our participants for their insights and time.

Ron Gura, SVP Product, WeWork

Markus Pultweiser, Chief Digital Officer, Deutsche Bank

Kriti Sharma, VP Product, GfK

Martin Eriksson, Co-Founder, Mind the Product; Chief Product Officer in Residence, EQT Ventures

Johannes Bruder, Chief Product Officer, Delivery Hero

Tanya Cordrey, Founder, Granary Square; Partner, AFK Partners

Brian Harris, SVP Product, Nets Group

Ben Fox, Chief Product Officer, AdTech, Verizon Media

Josh Crossick, Chief Product Officer, letgo

David Katz, Chief Product Officer, Afterpay

David Cramer, CEO, Software and Data, CPA Global

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices