FTSE 350 CHROs: Are today's HR leaders ready for tomorrow's challenges? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

FTSE 350 CHROs: Are Today's HR Leaders Ready For Tomorrow's Challenges?

Inclusive LeadershipSuccessionHuman Resources OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchC-Suite Succession

Article

Anna Penfold

June 03, 2021

5 min

Inclusive LeadershipSuccessionHuman Resources OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchC-Suite Succession

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The COVID-19 crisis has elevated the role of CHROs and put an emphasis on recruiting and developing internal talent that is adaptable and agile.

Close

Anna Penfold

London

The future of work will be different from the past. This much is obvious — but the extent to which the future of work relies on HR leaders has also never been clearer. The pandemic has accelerated a move to a distributed workforce, redefining the office as a hub for creative collaboration and social interaction rather than a daily destination. The shape of the workforce is changing, as well, with many leaders concerned about the availability of the skills they need to move strategy forward.1 At the same time, environmental, sustainability and social justice issues have risen to the fore, catalyzing new expectations of employers to take a stand on issues both inside and outside the organization.

Talent strategies must evolve to match future needs. HR leaders are now tasked with revolutionizing compensation and benefits policies and rethinking performance management systems to incentivize a hybrid and purpose-oriented workforce. Deploying the right technology is a huge component of these efforts, as is applying a diversity, equity and inclusion lens to all talent decisions. Recent research on the future of work identified 21 new HR roles — including the Future of Work Leader, Gig Economy Manager and Human Bias Officer — that will be necessary to help the workforce adapt to new realities.2

This evolution has major implications for the CHRO role. The profile of a listed company CHRO is already starting to shift in response to the changing work environment. This is partly an agile response to lessons learned throughout the pandemic and a smart way to prepare for its lingering effects. The question that all leaders must confront, however, is whether today’s CHROs are ready for tomorrow’s challenges.

To better understand the current state of the role and future implications, Russell Reynolds Associates recently analyzed the backgrounds, career paths and tenures of FTSE 350 CHROs. Based on our findings, we identify three important trends in how CHRO appointments have evolved over the years, and since the start of the pandemic. We also look at key considerations for boards, CEOs and CHROs as they hire and develop the next generation of HR leaders.

The Evolution Of FTSE 350 CHROs

01.  There has been an increasing preference for CHROs with experience in the role or in other parts of the business over time

The pandemic further accelerated this trend. Public company boards and CEOs are looking for galvanizing leaders during this time of crisis. Consequently, there has been a rise in appointments of experienced (sitting) CHROs, and executives with significant experiences in other parts of the business.

02. The pandemic has elevated the CHRO role and put the focus back on talent

Public company boards and CEOs are increasingly concerned with their ability to find and retain employees with the right skills and experiences, as RRA’s 2021 Global Leadership Monitor survey confirmed. An emphasis on diversity may also be putting the spotlight on the talent function. Consequently, there has been a rise in appointments of CHROs with talent backgrounds.

03. The CHRO role continues to be an important source of C-suite diversity

More women than men now occupy these top roles, a trend that has intensified since the start of the pandemic, making it a rare bright spot for gender diversity in the C-suite. This high demand is further propelled by the fact that most CHROs directly or indirectly own the organization’s diversity, equity and inclusion agenda.

Looking ahead: leadership considerations for future CHROs

01. Trend

More than half of recently appointed CHROs have previously held the role, as organizations flock to safety in times of crisis

Future implications: While an experienced CHRO may be a safe choice, their preferred playbooks may not meet the organization’s changing needs. As the structure of work evolves, the CHRO’s remit increasingly will include deep technology expertise to enable a distributed workforce along with the ability to speak the language of social justice and manage difficult conversations. This means CEOs and boards must redefine what experiences and skills a CHRO needs to best serve the organization. While past experience in the role will always be an attractive criterion, it is important to look beyond pure experience and consider the personal attributes, or competencies, that a candidate can bring to the role.

02. Trend

Successful CHRO candidates increasingly have a background in talent management.

Future implications: As talent becomes an even higher priority, it will be essential to include it in development plans for high-potential HR professionals. Talent is not only one of the most strategic elements of HR, it is also one of the most likely to be on the board’s radar, which helps future leaders build important connections. Looking more broadly, rotations for high-potential HR talent should also include HR analytics and other data and technology-oriented roles to prepare for a future CHRO job.

03. Trend

The majority of FTSE 350 CHROs are women, providing gender balance to many C-suites

Future implications: As more companies look to add gender diversity via the CHRO role, they risk over-relying on a finite pool of experienced female candidates. This points to the need for better, more proactive succession planning for the CHRO role, and more broadly, across the C-suite; an issue that more than 60% of executives identified as an area of weakness for their leadership teams in the 2021 GLM. Better succession planning means starting the process earlier and launching internal development efforts as well as external market searches to maximize the number of qualified candidates. As other roles start to see higher levels of diversity, the CHRO role will be under less pressure to be the (sometimes sole) representative of C-suite diversity.

Conclusion

Throughout the pandemic, successful CHROs have shown themselves to be agile, commercially astute and ready to collaborate across functions and business units to ensure business continuity and employee wellbeing.

In the wake of massive disruption, organizations have a unique opportunity to re-make and re-tool with the goal of performing better in the future. As organizations look to hire and develop their next HR leaders — as well as other C-suite executives — it is critical to take a fresh view of what the organization requires from the role and who is best suited to fill it.

As recent CHRO appointments converge around certain characteristics, leaders would do well to take them into account, while also considering more broadly the requirements for success in the role over the next five to 10 years.

Methodology

This analysis is based on FTSE 350 Chief Human Resources Officers route to the top data as of March 2021 and includes 204 CHROs

Additional Authors

Harsonal Sachar leads Knowledge for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Human Resources Officers and Legal, Regulatory & Compliance Officers practices. She is based in Toronto.
Alix Stuart is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. She is based in Boston.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank their colleague Shrishti Rai for her helpful contributions to the creation of this study.

1 2021 Global Leadership Monitor: Leadership preparedness for the road ahead, Russell Reynolds Associates, May 4, 2021
2 Meister, Jeanne C. and Robert H. Brown, 21 HR Jobs of the Future, Harvard Business Review, August 12, 2020

FTSE 350 CHROs:

Are today’s HR leaders ready for tomorrow’s challenges?

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices