Why a Little Levity Is an Essential Leadership Quality | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why a Little Levity Is an Essential Leadership Quality

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Effectiveness

Article

October 19, 2020

5 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Effectiveness

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Humility, heart and honesty all are important for leaders to exhibit in the workplace as they manage people, motivate teams and pursue goals.

Close

Working adults are “in the midst of a laughter drought,” said Eric Tsytsylin in a TED-like presentation at Stanford’s Graduate School of Business seven years ago. I wonder how Tsytsylin would characterize our laughter drought today. We’re under a siege of issues that require our full attention, but how long is it sustainable without a little relief from our dehydration?

Research from Wharton, MIT, and London Business School concludes that “laughter relieves stress and boredom, boosts engagement and well-being, and spurs not only creativity and collaboration but also analytic precision and productivity.”

I recall a time in my career when we experienced a similar laughter drought. We were in the midst of the economic downturn in 2009, and I was about a year into my leadership role as CEO of Prologis. We were still on the ropes, but our stock value was slowly improving. As things started to look better for us, it was time to bring all the leaders from our offices in Europe, Asia, and the Americas together for a weekend in Colorado. I thought it would be a great opportunity to connect while giving our fatigued team the moral support of one another in person.

I chose to take the team on a hike that would lead us to one of the huts overseen by the 10th Mountain Division Hut Association in Colorado. I envisioned an authentic Colorado trip for this hardworking group and looked forward to our time away from the constant pressure at the office.

Having worked up an appetite from our hike to the hut, we devoured dinner and made time to talk shop before we settled in to play cards. As the night wore on, a colleague and I decided to retire early -- but not before playing a prank on the rest of the group. We crept upstairs, quickly hid everyone’s clothes, and pretended to sleep.

Later, everyone else made their bleary-eyed way to the second floor, hands outstretched to navigate dark and unfamiliar surroundings. As they discovered their clothing was gone, it was all my colleague and I could do not to shake with laughter under our covers.

Clearly, we were the culprits. Before the others could think of some leverage to get their clothes back, our chief investment officer—who was at the end of his short fuse—grabbed a fire extinguisher, and pointed it at my partner-in-crime. We fought to keep our eyes closed and our breathing calm so we didn’t blow our plan, but our CIO was done waiting. After several warnings, he pulled the pin and opened up the entire contents of the canister on my colleague.

Pressurized carbon dioxide exploded all over the room!

Seconds later, we all were coughing and scrambling down the stairs, straining to catch our breath.

Once we opened all the windows and collapsed into chairs on the first floor, we started laughing at how ridiculous it all was. We were grown men covered in chalky powder and now we had to deal with a second floor that looked like a complete whiteout.

Humor can be your multiplier

The whole team went on to do great things for the company—and I like to think our ability to laugh together had a good deal to do with that. In fact, I’ve found that humor can be an essential multiplier of leadership values—particularly humility, honesty, and heart, or what I call a 3H-Core. I believe great leaders live and lead by these three values. Simply put:

Humility frames how leaders see themselves.

Heart frames how leaders see others.

Honesty is the action that leaders take to connect them together.

Each one of these values are important for leaders to exhibit in the workplace as they manage people, motivate teams, and pursue goals. When you live out your beliefs and allow yourself to couple them with some levity, a formidable culture becomes your competitive advantage—especially when you need it most. Allow me to explain:

Humility

Humor accentuates humility because it allows us to engage in brief moments of vulnerability that, typically, are low risk and high return. In other words, psychologically safe. After the dust literally and figuratively settled on the first floor of that mountain hut, our ability to laugh at ourselves as we blinked away the white powder all over our faces meant we were willing to bear the brunt of a prank. It was a conspiratorial and safe moment—we were all in on the joke.

The shared vulnerability we experienced enabled us later to accept our imperfections with a healthy perspective back at the office. And that perspective allowed us to approach the workplace in a more lighthearted way. Together, we learned never to underestimate the importance of our ability to humbly laugh at ourselves when leading others. It only makes us more human.

Honesty

Honesty is another 3H-Core value that’s enhanced by humor. Often what makes something funny is one person’s brutal honesty and willingness to say what everyone is thinking. For example, one of the companies whose board I serve on likes to familiarize us with the staff beyond C-level attendees. So, they invite rising executives to join us for dinner the night before our meetings begin. It’s a great way to get to know the company in a casual setting.

As we debated about how this evening would be replicated virtually, the ubiquitous Zoom call was suggested in lieu of our dinner. A fellow board member joked, “It’s too bad we can’t have this get together over a bottle of wine if we’re supposed to have ‘dinner conversation.’”

The company’s CEO didn’t miss a beat; he said, “We can do that!” It wasn’t long before a carefully wrapped bottle of wine arrived at the homes of everyone invited to the next meeting. This simple change in the tenor of our conversation is a perfect example of how honesty buoyed by humor helped us arrive at a creative alternative to business as usual.

Heart

Lighthearted moments can also show the heart of a leader. For instance, if you had told me that showing my heart for coworkers might have meant deep knee bends and alternating kicks to a rousing Israeli folk song, I wouldn’t have believed you. But when my staff challenged my colleague and me to a friendly dance-off at our annual holiday party years ago, I was happy to oblige because I knew it was symbolic of something greater.

On the surface, we were all laughing and enjoying the moment as the song reached an exhausting pace. Below the surface, something equally wonderful was happening. Our staff was experiencing our lighthearted and approachable side. That shared experience and others like it would create goodwill everyone could draw upon in tougher times. Forming a people-first culture means putting an emphasis on others who work for your organization in a variety of ways—even when it involves a dizzying performance of “Hava Nagila.”

Humor is subjective, but that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t attempt it. A little levity is a great way to exercise these leadership values in a safe context where budgets, pilot programs, or goals aren’t at risk. Instead, your staff can experience who you are as a person, which makes it easier when work takes on increasing pressure.

Human nature requires a balance of emotions for us to sustain any effort over the long haul. The good-natured laughs you share become the bond you can lean on for years to come. As we make our way forward in the near future, I hope you find your own opportunities for laughter like we did in the stories I’ve shared above. If you do decide to give a little levity a whirl, don’t forget to hide the fire extinguisher!

Walt Rakowich is an author, leadership speaker and former CEO of Prologis, a global real estate company that is the world’s largest owner of industrial distribution facilities. When he took over the reins of the company, it had nearly collapsed with a stock valuation that was down over 95 percent in ten months. In the years that followed, he and his team implemented a change in culture, orchestrating a dramatic turnaround and restoring the company’s position in the industry. His first book, Transfluence: How To Lead With Transformative Influence In Today’s Climates of Change, was released in September 2020. He works with several nonprofits, serves on the board of directors of Host Hotels and Resorts, Iron Mountain Inc., and Ventas Inc., and is on the board of trustees of The Pennsylvania State University. He earned an undergraduate degree from Penn State University and an MBA from Harvard Business School.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices