Inside the Mind of the Family Office Leader | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Inside the Mind of the Family Office Leader

Family BusinessInvestment ManagementFamily EnterpriseAssessment and Benchmarking

Interview

April 10, 2025

10 min

Family BusinessInvestment ManagementFamily EnterpriseAssessment and Benchmarking

Executive Summary

What distinguishes the family office leader? Our research uncovers four key behavioral characteristics defining this unique leader.

Close

Jeff Warren

Los Angeles

Sean Dineen

Boston

Family offices operate in times of heightened complexity – growing multigenerational families, nascent younger investors, and shifting socioeconomic dynamics, as well as technology innovations alongside cyber risks and potential regulatory pressures – and the landscape is rapidly evolving.

As a result, family offices must have forward-thinking leaders willing to professionalize the office, upgrade the executive team, instill a culture of stewardship, and ensure the highest degree of sophistication to serve diverse stakeholders.

At Russell Reynolds Associates, we’ve observed the family office’s changing talent needs firsthand, which prompted us to deepen our understanding of the family office leader. We set out to learn the shared attributes, behaviors, and characteristics that lead to success in this role, so as to better identify, assess, and develop the family office leader of the future – and to help families better understand the leaders who are so crucial to their operations.

Our research approach was twofold. First, we analyzed the Hogan psychometric test scores of over 30 family office leaders, with a focus on common personality traits and values. Next, we conducted over a dozen interviews with family office leaders across the US, uncovering insights that provided additional context around our identified Hogan psychometric trends. Via these combined efforts, we learned that:

Family office leaders bring a quiet confidence to drive successful outcomes with adaptability, composure, and grace

Four key behavioral characteristics define the family office leader

Compared to financial services CEOs, family office leaders tend to be more direct, pragmatic, measured, and risk conscious in their leadership

Family office leaders bring a quiet confidence to drive successful outcomes with adaptability, composure, and grace

Since the establishment of the first family offices in the 19th century, there are now an estimated 8,030 single family offices globally, with over $5 trillion in total estimated wealth with expected growth to $9.5 trillion by 2030. Despite unprecedented change, the one constant has been the invaluable role of family office and family enterprise leadership.

Today, family office leaders must manage myriad responsibilities. As family wealth skyrockets, the question of what – or rather, who – drives the strategic agenda is now central to that discussion. This is further complicated by family office’s unique circumstances and risk factors (see Figure 1):

Figure 1: Circumstances and risk factors impacting family office leadership

Leadership

Investments

Family Dynamics

High Risk

Complex leadership transitions and succession planning involving a patriarch or matriarch

Demands for investment portfolio diversification, alongside differing distribution needs and risk appetites among family members

Codifying and translating institutional knowledge from family members

Medium Risk

Opaque or undefined governance structures with weak communication protocols

Increased threat of financial and non-financial (i.e. cyber, operational, reputational) risks

Investing in the leadership potential—via education and development—of the next generation of family members

Lower Risk

Recruiting and retaining specialized talent, while simultaneously developing a bench of generalists to coach and mentor

Understanding nuanced topics, such as capital allocation, estate planning, gift tax strategies, philanthropic investment strategies, and tax reformation

Aligning on philanthropic goals to create a unified definition of the family’s legacy and values

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates interviews. N = 14 family office leaders. Data collected and analyzed in H2 2024.

While most leaders would be daunted by the idiosyncratic nature of the family office landscape, family office leaders tend to bring:

A quiet confidence that drives successful outcomes even in the most challenging circumstances

Adaptability, composure, and grace across numerous forces

Distinguished gravitas that inspires confidence when dealing with generational differences, investment and estate planning issues, and day-to-day office operations, among other challenges

By aligning their values to serve a unified mission, family office leaders can effectively drive a vision of success for the whole family.

Four key behavioral characteristics define the family office leader

After analyzing the Hogan psychometric test scores of 34 family office executives and including the insights from more than a dozen interviews, we uncovered four key behavioral characteristics that define the family office leader.

Hogan’s assessment tools score individuals across 28 metrics including: their day-to-day behavioral tendencies (HPI), how they perform under pressure (HDS), and their motivations and drivers (MVPI). Through the lens of an industrial-organizational psychologist, the quantitative and qualitative data provides rich insights into an individual’s core preferences, derailers, and interests.

The four key behavioral characteristics that define the family office leader:

Thoughtful listening and transparent communication

Prudent and informed decision-making

Professional, grounded, and humble advisory style

Resilient and reliable leadership

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates interviews. N = 14 family office leaders. Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of Hogan psychometric data. N = 34 family office leaders. Data collected and analyzed in H2 2024.

1. Thoughtful listening and transparent communication

Family office leaders demonstrate a transparent communication style, as indicated by their scores on measures pertaining to social proactivity and interpersonal style. They adeptly lead meetings, balancing listening with a readiness to state their views, and will skillfully address difficult topics. They navigate conversations with a keen sense of timing and an appropriate degree of urgency, leading others to conclusions via a thoughtful set of questions as opposed to telling them the answers. While these leaders are prepared to assert their views, they are also mindful and considerate of the impact their actions will have, ensuring their stakeholders feel heard and understood.

“You have to communicate well and speak truth to power.”

CEO and Chief Investment Officer
Midwest family office

"You’re the leader, but not really. You have to have the humility to follow the family’s lead."

Managing Partner
New York area family office

2. Prudent and informed decision-making

Family office leaders show a prudent and informed decision-making style through their scores on measures of learning style, process-orientation, and curiosity. They are diligent learners who stay on top of trends in their space, invest in their and their team’s professional development, and stay highly attuned to new information concerning their clients. Their strong learning inclination is complemented by a methodical decision-making approach. These leaders will think before they act, minimizing unnecessary risks and increasing their propensity to make high quality decisions. They are thoughtful stewards of the family’s resources, as noted by their scores on a commercial orientation measure.

“You have to look for optionality…having the flexibility, patience, and understanding that [a family’s decision] may not be the easiest way to accomplish something, but we will find a path to get it done.”

CEO
Rocky Mountain States family office

"You have to be flexible and adaptable with problem solving, because you’re balancing making various family members satisfied in different ways."

President
Mid-Atlantic family office

3. Professional, grounded, and humble advisory style

Family office leaders demonstrate a professional and humble advisory style, as indicated by their scores on measures pertaining to composure, consistency, visibility, and pleasure-seeking. They will remain calm and consistent in the face of changing circumstances, staying on task even when challenged or provoked. They voluntarily share credit with others and find comfort when leading quietly from behind, fostering buy-in – even from unorthodox or obstinate stakeholders. Their understated confidence and dependable approach to challenges strengthens their credibility, garnering the trust and acceptance of their clients and team.

“You need to be able to admit that you don’t know what you don’t know.”

President and COO
Mid-Atlantic family office

"To succeed, you have to admit your mistakes without dwelling on them. You acknowledge it without staying there."

President
Midwest family office

4. Resilient and reliable leadership

Family office leaders model a resilient leadership style through their scores on measures of drive and energy, resilience, and conscientiousness. They are hardworking leaders who will earn the followship of others through their commitment and drive. They model a steadfast and resilient approach to challenges, bringing others together during difficult times and motivating their teams to continue pressing forward. And when facing adversity, they are relentlessly reliable in following through on their commitments.

“You have to win the trust and loyalty of the family office staff, as you’re only as good as what your team delivers. You have to coach your team on the values you’re trying to embody for the family.”

CEO
New York family office

Each of these behavioral characteristics represent shared tendencies and keys to success as a leader in the family office setting. Through these interviews, we uncovered how some of their common personality traits and values enable these leaders to meet the unique challenges they consistently face in a family office setting. For those who aspire to get to this position or for organizations looking to identify and/or select leaders who can be successful, these four behavioral characteristics provide a blueprint for consideration.

Compared to financial services CEOs, family office leaders tend to be more direct, pragmatic, measured, and risk conscious in their leadership

To further our understanding of family office leaders, we then compared these Hogan scores to the broader Hogan database of financial services CEOs. Our results found six statistically significant differences between the two datasets (see Figure 2):

Figure 2: Differences between family office leaders and financial services CEOs

Source: Russell Reynolds Associates proprietary analysis of Hogan psychometric data. N = 34 FO leaders relative to FS CEO database.

Interpersonal Sensitivity - concerns communication style, social skill, and tact. / Mischievous - concerns being charming, risk-taking, and excitement-seeking. / Colorful - concerns being outgoing and socially skilled. / Imaginative - concerns being innovative and creative. / Affiliation - concerns seeking opportunities to build social networks and collaborate with people. / Hedonism - concerns wanting fun, variety, and enjoyment in the workplace. Figure uses mean scores across samples of FO leaders and FS CEOs, and focuses on differences that are statistically significant.

These differences correlate to the following tendencies (see Figure 3):

Figure 3: Tendencies of family office leaders and financial services CEOs

Hogan Scale

Family Office Leaders are likely to…

Financial Services CEOs are likely to…

Interpersonal Sensitivity

Address conflict with candidness and tact

Navigate office politics and build coalitions

Mischievous

Avoid unnecessary risks and take a more measured approach

Test limits and experiment with new approaches

Colorful

Focus on cohesion and cooperation over self-promotion

Exhibit charismatic, bold, and attention seeking behavior

Imaginative

Prefer proven and sensible ideas

Generate bold or differentiated ideas

Affiliation

Enjoy a balance of independent and group work

Enjoy social work environments that offer networking opportunities

Hedonism

Value a buttoned up and measured work environment

Value a mix of business and pleasure

The overall takeaway: family office leaders are generally more direct in their leadership style compared to their counterparts in financial services. They bring a grounded and measured style that helps them navigate complex and, at times, emotional stakeholder dynamics. Adept at managing risks, they broker solutions with a healthy degree of pragmatism and consideration. For family office leaders who want to expand their networks and public visibility, they have an opportunity to be more active in social engagements.

The future of family office leadership

With the demand for family office leaders on the rise, our research reveals the critical capabilities to look out for when identifying, selecting, and developing leaders for these complex and nuanced roles. These four key characteristics create the foundation for leaders to be stewards of the family’s resources, while shepherding the organization alongside the family’s strategic needs and vision.

Thoughtful listening and transparent communication

Prudent and informed decision-making

Professional, grounded, and humble advisory style

Resilient and reliable leadership

The modern era continues to challenge family offices, making it critical to ensure the highest degree of leadership sophistication and nuance. The demands on these leaders will only continue to rise, testing their ability to navigate ever-increasing complexity. While there is no silver bullet for leadership, our research has clearly identified standout characteristics that enable family office leaders to succeed in this unique context.

Authors

Jeff Warren leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Family Office Practice. He is based in Los Angeles.
Sean Dineen is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in Boston.
James Baek is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Services Knowledge team. He is based in New York.
Jerry Doaty is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory group. He is based in New York.
Randy Octuck is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory Knowledge team. He is based in San Francisco.

Inside the Mind of the Family Office Leader

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices