The Rise of the General Counsel | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Rise of the General Counsel

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionEducationLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersExecutive Search

Article

Anne Coyle

January 21, 2020

4 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionEducationLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

More higher education institutes find themselves hiring in-house general counsels to be a member of the senior team focused exclusively on legal issues.

Close

Anne Coyle

Boston

Russell Reynolds Associates’ recent analysis of general counsels at the top 50 liberal arts colleges reveals the most common past experiences of legal executives in higher education, as well as variations in the scopes of their current roles.

Higher education has become an increasingly litigious environment in recent years. You needn’t look any further than recent Chronicle of Higher Education headlines to understand why: “Michigan State’s Ex-President, Who Faces Criminal Charges, Will Retire with a $2.5 Million Payout,” “U. of Southern California Doctor Is Accused of Sexually Abusing 48 Patients,” “Strikes at Colleges Are at a 7-Year High as Unions Rebound” and “Higher-Ed Groups Are Warning Against ‘Surveillance’ of Chinese Academics. On Some Campuses, That’s Already Begun” are but a few examples of the myriad issues institutions face. This is on top of routine, day-to-day legal matters such as contracts, employment agreements, and regulatory and Title IX compliance work that have long been part and parcel of running any organization.

Almost every college and university today has outside legal counsel, private law firms they can call on to assist in both routine and extraordinary matters. But as legal issues increase, academic institutions are starting to shift away from relying solely on external counsels—who, by virtue of their third-party status, tend to be more reactive than proactive—and toward hiring a general counsel (GC) who can handle the bulk of legal needs internally, while turning to external counsel for assistance as needed.

Large research universities have long had GCs. Recently, however, we have seen a spike in top liberal arts colleges starting to consider or actively creating this new role.

While some may question the perceived added expense of hiring a general counsel, bringing the role in-house typically results in a substantial reduction in spending on external legal work. GCs can address a number of issues themselves, many proactively, allowing them to be judicious in their use of their external counsel and the amount the institution spends on them.

How big an issue is spending on external legal services? A look at the most recent IRS 990 tax filings for liberal arts colleges that do not have in-house legal counsel reveals that many of them now spend so much that they need to list their law firms among their five highest-compensated independent contractors. Take Pomona College, for example: The California institution spent over $1.34 million across two law firms in one recent year. Hamilton College in New York spent $787,848.

We do not question the validity of these expenditures; we simply note that they are part of the body of evidence that suggests that institutions now need to wrestle with legal issues in addition to academics, student affairs, campus operations and the physical plant. The result is that presidents are now thinking about adding a role to their senior team focused largely, if not exclusively, on legal issues.

According to research we conducted earlier this year with our colleagues Katie Whittum and Kara Finnerty, just about half—24 of 50—of top liberal arts colleges today have an individual who holds an explicit role as a legal advisor to the institution. Titles vary, for reasons we will discuss momentarily. Eleven of them are called “general counsel,” the title we use here when talking about the group as a whole. Regardless of the title, this is a rapidly emerging position and institutions are wrestling with how to define the job and whom to hire for it.

When we examined the backgrounds of each of these GCs and explored their role at their institution, we got a better understanding of the individuals and how they spend their time:

While it may be tempting to combine the GC role with another senior position, it also creates challenges. A GC who also leads a function (like HR or finance) would have trouble providing independent legal oversight and guidance of those operations. Similarly, a GC who runs a function will have no shortage of things to do and will likely need to rely more heavily on outside counsel to address the institution’s legal needs, resulting in added expense.

Hiring a general counsel is different from hiring for other more traditional roles, and understanding where to start the recruitment process can be difficult. When looking for candidates, presidents and chief human resources officers at liberal arts colleges should consider the following:

Look at major universities. Most have large general counsel offices, with multiple assistant, associate or “director of” roles—all individuals with tremendous experience and an existing understanding of higher education culture, some of whom may welcome the opportunity to step up into a GC position at a smaller institution.

Look at your current external law firm. The lawyers who currently support your institution are not only higher education experts, but they are also intimately familiar with your institution, your people and your issues. As an added bonus, if they take the GC role and continue to use the external law firm for work, they know that firm intimately as well.

Look at major law firms for lawyers with ties to your community and relevant expertise. One recent analysis calculated the chance of making partner at a major (Am Law 200) law firm at less than 16 percent—and at many firms, less than 1 percent. These large firms are filled with talented lawyers with deep expertise, many of whom are desperately looking for an exit. While most colleges cannot match their compensation, they may offer a collegial environment, better work-life balance and meaningful work.

We may all wish for a decline in the number of regulatory and legal issues facing colleges, but until then, college leaders need to make legal decisions, and having a GC on their team who can proactively work to address issues before they spiral out of hand can help prevent them from ending up as newspaper headlines.

Additional Authors

PJ Neal manages Russell Reynolds Associates’ Center for Leadership Insight. He is based in Boston.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices