Building a Future-Proof Automotive Leadership Team | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Building a Future-Proof Automotive Leadership Team

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipConsumerHuman Resources OfficersTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

Article

March 16, 2020

6 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipConsumerHuman Resources OfficersTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Software and technology continue to alter how automotive companies operate, bringing a change in leadership to handle this new dynamic.

Close

Graham Ruddle

Chicago

Paul Stohr

Minneapolis - St Paul

Software and digitization have redefined the automotive/mobility industry

The mobility solutions of the future will require higher levels of data processing, communication between infrastructure and cloud-based systems and, critically, a different executive profile. Russell Reynolds Associates recently spoke with 13 senior automotive executives who are at the forefront of this transformation to discuss the implications for talent and leadership.

The total value of software in a passenger vehicle is expected to grow from approximately 10 percent now to 30 percent by 2030.1 This rapid growth and enhanced value proposition will put further pressure on automotive/mobility companies to attract and develop software and technical talent that can help them partake in this growth story. Identifying, attracting, retaining and developing blue-chip software and mobility talent poses a huge issue for both OEMs and suppliers.

Within the next two to three years, we will change 80 to 90 percent of our senior leadership at the director level and above to reflect the impact of software and technology.

- SVP, Mobility at a leading global automotive technology company

The DNA of a future-focused automotive/mobility leader

Based on our proprietary executive data pool, we used our Leadership Span tool to benchmark the psychometric profiles of automotive C-suite executives against those in software and cloud, hardware and IoT, as well as cross-industry executives.

In general, the automotive executive group can be described as disruptive risk takers, who tend to operate behind the scenes rather than leading in a highly visible and galvanizing manner. Furthermore, the automotive executives “span” less across the competencies than their counterparts in technology and may thus be a bit less agile. This may indicate that they are in general more traditional in their approach or more used to operating and leading in a certain way.

About RRA Leadership Span

In conjunction with Hogan Assessments, Russell Reynolds developed Leadership Span, a unique assessment methodology that measures the ability of senior executives to span and adapt with ease to new situations.

Leadership Span is a proxy for agility, in that leaders who have higher span tend to be better at adapting and adjusting their leadership style and deploying different approaches as the business context changes.

Agility should be in the automotive leader's DNA:

As automotive businesses seek to future-proof their business models, agility will be key. Automotive boards, CEOs and CHROs should therefore reflect on how they can embed individuals who “span” more broadly than traditional automotive executives. For example, not only do technology executives score higher on disruptive and risk taking, they score significantly higher on heroic and galvanizing.

Focus on executives with a customer centric mindset:

With changing customer needs and preferences at the heart of the transformation of the industry, executives will need an increasingly customer-centric mindset to succeed. We know from our Leadership Span data that “customer activators” are pragmatic risk takers and team-oriented relationship-builders. This allows them to make fast decisions, course-correct and iterate quickly based on an influx of data and information. Their pragmatic nature means they appropriately filter this information and determine where to focus and when to pivot.

Automotive/mobility needs “future-proof” leaders with new skills

In addition to looking at our proprietary Leadership Span psychometric data, we spoke with several senior industry executives to find out what traits the future focused automotive leader has, and where the gaps are between the current automotive leadership population and the mobility leaders of the future.

Everyone we spoke with agreed that the current dynamics in the industry have manifested themselves in a more complex skill set demanded of automotive leaders. Historically, automotive players valued hiring leaders who were industry veterans, pragmatic revenue/growth-driven. Notably, future automotive leaders will need to engage beyond the automotive realm with automotive technology, the startup ecosystem and smart cities. At the core of all of the aforementioned lie changing consumer demands and expectations, which vary widely by region (and sometimes even by country).

In order to harness this kind of talent, automotive companies should today be looking at potential candidate pools outside the industry. For external hires from outside the automotive industry, each industry, as well as each function, will have pockets of strength—for example, the best talent in infotainment and telematics can bring world-class customer experience knowledge related to the connected car. The strategic agenda of the company, and the value-add needed by the hire in question, must inform which talent pool is to constitute the “bull’s-eye” for talent.

Three key steps to future-proof an automotive/mobility business

Enhance leadership buy-in

In our interviews, several executives addressed the concern that many C-level leaders and board members need a deeper understanding of software and its impact on the industry. According to Russell Reynolds Associates’ latest Digital Pulse survey, the automotive industry overall lags a bit behind other industries on the digital journey, especially when it comes to full organizational commitment to digital, the drive from the top and the ability to change and react fast enough.

Our advice on enhancing leadership buy-in

Digital initiatives should be backed by the CEO and driven "top down"

Automotive CEOs need to reinvent themselves as software and technology advocates in order to allocate resources optimally, create board engagement, set out a clear agenda for transformation and redefine ownership between business functions. When planning out succession for future leadership, companies need to look for CEO candidates who span broadly (see page 4) and have an agile mindset. CEO candidates will increasingly have had exposure to software and digital enterprises as opposed to having spent their entire careers in traditional automotive.

Increase the density of digital talent in the organization

The automotive industry not only needs to recruit an army of software engineers and data scientists to build in-house data/software capabilities, but also needs general managers and P&L leaders who can effectively understand and lead different parts of the business. Such leaders should bring knowledge of new business models and data monetization models from other industries.

Broaden leadership's digital acumen and aptitude

Automakers should actively broaden their current leadership team’s digital acumen. One solution is establishing a technology advisory board to provide advice and insights pertaining to a variety of evolving technological trends that impact the business. Ideally, the advisory board is comprised of members from diverse backgrounds and from other disruptive functions and industries. Exposing the advisory board to the broader group of executives can have a profound impact on the leadership team’s knowledge of the disruptive trends in the industry.

Define clear organizational ownership of the software transformation agenda

Similar to any other industry undergoing digital transformation, software initiatives and digital efforts in automotive companies often start with specific projects isolated within traditional functions. Digital teams are embedded in different functions of the organization and are not necessarily linked or driven by a common strategy. This type of “early adopter” structure helps the company develop go-to-market strategies quickly but could lead to potential issues in terms of consistency across the business and missed opportunities for digital synergies.

As the digital element becomes more complex, automakers will need to evolve into a “digital-native” mindset, where the digital strategy is set at the top of the organization and capabilities are embedded in all functions. It is critical that the strategy is well communicated and understood by the entire organization. A digital “center of excellence” (often led by the CTO/CDO) can be established as a standalone, cross-functional unit that links the business efforts in different functions that pertain to digital mobility.

CTOs and CDOs Need to be the “Captains” Driving This Change:

While CEOs and board members need to be sold on the benefits of the digital initiative, CDOs/CTOs should be elevated to the ExCo to advise on the possible advantages of particular software and technology. For the transformation agenda to succeed, CDOs/CTOs need to actively engage and manage stakeholders—including convincing the board and the traditional functions—as they invest in the future. When hiring for the next CDO/ CTO to be the change agent, companies need to assess for a disruptive mindset, personal impact and change management skills.

All Legacy Business Functions Should be Involved:

As it becomes an increasingly table stakes strategic issue, it is crucial that not only the C-level executives have a clear vision for software, but that each function and department be fully equipped with both digital capabilities and the software talent to implement the strategy. Companies should not only place digital talent at the top, but also gradually embed digital brainpower across each legacy business function.

3 Transform your culture into one that is agile and entrepreneurial

Virtually all automotive executives identified two common pitfalls: the traditional “build-test-perfect” automotive culture and rigid compensation models. These two features currently prevent companies from being competitive in attracting and retaining top software talent as well as fulfilling the full potential in talent when integrating software leaders into the current automotive leadership team.

Like any organization undergoing transformation, culture is central to success. In order to cultivate a future-proof culture, the mindset in automotive companies must thus switch from being rigidly engineering-/product-driven to being more agile, flexible and decentralized.

When talent joins us from a small startup environment, their speed to move from concept to prototype testing can be as short as a few days or weeks. In automotive, they are finding that this method is challenging, as the processes take years and are incredibly expensive.

- CTO, leading global automotive technology company

Our advice on cultural transformation

Establish "Internal Incubators”:

Many automotive players have begun to adopt new strategies to tackle the culture issue, one being to relocate “disruptive” talent away from the HQ and to a tech hub (such as Silicon Valley) so they are in an entrepreneurial environment. Setting up local tech labs/centers allows automotive companies to promote entrepreneurship and recruit top-tier software talent directly from the front lines.

Align Motivation with Software/Digital Strategy:

C-suite leaders and HR must partner with software experts, internally and externally, to design KPIs that reward software innovation and the monetization of data. The compensation structure also needs to evolve from the traditional “base, bonus, equity” to an incentive- and equity-driven formula more aligned with the technology community.

Preparing the Workforce for Agility:

In addition to redesigning the organizational structure and company culture, developing talent is the key success factor for agile transformation. Developing the skill set and mindset for agility within the current workforce and leadership should be among an automotive company’s top priorities. Senior individuals can get valuable experience by serving in board positions on startups (for example, the ones their business invests in).

Set up New leaders for Success:

Once the right external talent has been identified and hired, it is crucial that they are empowered to create highperforming teams and provided with the right resources to execute on their mandate. This is paramount to the success of the new talent as well as their ability to have a positive impact on the organization.

Authors

Diane Ge is a member of the knowledge team for the Automotive Practice. She is based in Shanghai.
Graham Ruddle is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associate’s Global Automotive Practice. He is based in Chicago.
Paul Stohr leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Automotive Practice. He is based in Minneapolis.
NatashaTreschow is a member of the knowledge team for the Automotive Practice. She is based in London.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices