The Purpose Blueprint: Q&A with Albert Bourla | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

podcasts

The Purpose Blueprint: Q&A with Albert Bourla

The Purpose Blueprint: Q&A with Albert Bourla

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipTransformation and InnovationHealthcareSustainability OfficersTeam Performance

Article

October 16, 2020

17 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipTransformation and InnovationHealthcareSustainability OfficersTeam Performance

Pfizer CEO Albert Bourla says his company has a new determination to lead with purpose and to become one of the most purpose-driven organizations in the world.

Close

Jacques Bouwens

Amsterdam

Sarah Galloway

London

RRA Healthcare interview series “Healthcare Leading Forward: Sustainable Leadership in Action”

Albert Bourla is Chairman and CEO of Pfizer, a USD 52 billion multinational pharmaceutical company based in the US. Prior to taking the reins as CEO in January 2019, he served as Pfizer’s COO, responsible for overseeing the Company’s commercial strategy, manufacturing, and global product development functions. A doctor of veterinary medicine by training with a PhD in biotechnology, Albert has held a diverse range of roles since joining Pfizer in 1993, including leadership roles in Pfizer’s Animal Health divisions around the globe. He is on the executive committee of The Partnership for New York City, a trustee of the United States Council for International Business, and a member of the Business Roundtable and the Business Council.

Recently, Albert spoke with Jacques Bouwens, a Senior Partner in the Global Healthcare Sector, and Sarah Galloway, a co-leader of the Sustainability Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. He shared how Pfizer’s recent decision to lead with purpose has transformed the way it conducts its business.

The interview presented below has been edited and abridged for clarity.

Jacques Bouwens: Albert, it is a real pleasure to speak with you today. As Chairman and CEO, you lead Pfizer in its purpose, or “Breakthroughs that change patients’ lives.” But this purpose is only two years old. Can you please talk about the thought process behind choosing a new purpose for a 170-year-old company?

Albert Bourla: First of all, let me say how grateful I am for the opportunity to speak with you and Sarah. To answer your question, I do not think that Pfizer’s purpose is two years old. Pfizer's purpose, its reason for existing has always been what it is today – to bring medicines to people. What is new, however, is our determination to lead with this purpose, and to become one of the most purpose-driven organizations in the world. The reason we decided to do this was because, in general, companies that stay true to their purpose are able to perform much better than those that do not. In our particular case, with a purpose that can inspire thousands of employees who are working day and night, bringing it front and center gives us an additional boost to deliver on our promise to society.

When I took over, I knew that I had to build upon the great work of my predecessor. During his time, in the previous decade, Pfizer had a tremendous turnaround in its R&D and scientific capabilities. That allowed me to be able to reshape the company to be more science- and innovation-focused, by finding better homes for businesses that were more driven by other characteristics, such as our ability to manufacture, our ability to commercialize, etc.

When we decided to be a purpose-driven company, we knew that we would have to express our purpose in very simple terms, so that it would be communicated clearly and easy to remember. This is why we have chosen these precise words – Breakthroughs that change patients’ lives.

Every word was carefully selected, and each one was debated for months. “Breakthroughs,” for example, is there to indicate that our reason for existence is not to bring incremental innovation; our reason for existence is to bring disruptive innovation. And, in fact, breakthrough innovation is not only about science, but also about how we do business – this would be commercial innovation, because it is very clear that the pharma business model needs to be revised.

The word “change,” again, is speaking to the disruptive nature, to the magnitude of impact that we are aspiring to bring. We are not just thinking about bringing something that will “improve” patients’ lives; “change” patients’ lives means that we are aiming for things that only seem impossible; we are bringing about change through transformation. We are aiming for cures rather than incremental improvements.

And, lastly, speaking about “patients’ lives” – it is very clear, that we do not refer only to the people that are suffering, but also to the people that are suffering together with them. We need to change not only the life of a child that, for example, has Duchenne muscular dystrophy, but also the lives of the parents and the families.

That was the whole idea of creating something that will become the filter through which we make the decisions on everything we do in this company. And that becomes something that will be remembered every day, every hour, by everyone in this company and that will inspire everyone, every hour, in this company.

Sarah Galloway: How are you anchoring purpose in what you do as a leader day-to-day? And how are you ensuring your leaders integrate purpose into the business?

Albert Bourla: This is one of the most important questions, because the worst thing you can do is to launch an inspirational phrase and then demonstrate to all that you do not mean it. It starts with being able to walk the talk. When you say, “we are all about breakthroughs that change patients’ lives” and everything will be driven through these few words, you need to make sure that everybody, every day, sees that you mean it and you do it. This is extremely important.

By saying ‘Why’, we refer to why we exist – and that is the purpose. But this is not enough. We need to speak about ‘What’ needs to be done to be able to accomplish the purpose. Unlike the purpose that is a very durable concept – one that is here to stay for decades, the ‘What’ is changing and typically will change every five or ten years.

In our organization, we think about the ‘What’ in broad terms with a horizon of three to five years. It is what we call our bold moves, and this is our strategy for the next five years. Many people call it strategic imperatives. For us, we have five very clear directions, very meaningful in terms of business and expressed in a way that would be easy for everyone in the organization to remember. Those five things are the following: First, we need to ‘unleash the power of our people’, meaning we need to have an organization that people can thrive within. Second, we want to ‘deliver first-in-class science’, meaning we need to be innovators in science. Third, we need to ‘transform our go-to-market model’, to improve it. The fourth is to ‘win the digital race in pharma’, recognizing that digital is going to be extremely impactful, and that it is a race. Everybody is trying to [win that race], and one day, someone will – I want it to be us. And the last is to ‘lead the conversation,’ meaning we are affecting people's lives, and therefore, people's perspectives and perceptions about us are extremely important. Our reputation is by far the most valuable thing for the organization, and it starts with giving people their health.

A little bit later, because we wanted to get it right, we took a much deeper dive into the ‘How’, which is the culture in this organization. And again, we wanted to create a culture that is the right culture for the moment, as well as the right culture for the Pfizer of the next decade. We summarized it in four key values. The first is ‘courage’. This organization needs to dare, this organization needs to be able to speak up, this organization needs to think big because innovation and breakthroughs favor the bold. The second is ‘excellence,’ because when you have the lives of people in your hands, you need to operate at your best. The third value is ‘equity,’ because when we speak about health, we cannot differentiate human beings. This is very important as a driver of how we do things. And the last is ’joy’ – a little bit less corporate but one of the most important values for us. It speaks to the new generation that is coming up and to what their expectations of a working environment are. They want a working environment that has meaning, they do not just want to be part of a company that pays a salary and ensures a career path. They want to be part of a company that has an impact in the world, and that gives joy to them and, of course, is fun.

These were the steps that we took. Altogether, we call this the ‘Purpose Blueprint.’ It is the purpose of ‘why’, ‘what’ needs to be done and ‘how’ we are going to do. And I do not think it would be exaggerating for me to say that this one page – ‘Pfizer on one page’ – sits on the desk of literally every single Pfizer employee.

Sarah Galloway: Thank you, Albert. That brings me to the next question. If you were to look at diseases that affect everyone at this planet, how has purpose driven Pfizer’s efforts in the battle against COVID-19?

Albert Bourla: When we realized the magnitude of the problem, we felt that it was our obligation to jump onto it. This is what one should expect from a company that has the scientific and manufacturing capabilities that Pfizer has. We tried to understand very quickly the areas where we could make an impact and we selected three at the beginning. We then focused on two areas – the development of the vaccine and the development of an antiviral treatment. Both of them are progressing very nicely. The vaccine has advanced to phase three clinical studies. I am cautiously optimistic that it will work, but we will have to wait for the study data.

In terms of how that has affected us, our organization has never felt more proud of what we do. We recently ran a survey of close to 60,000 employees to measure engagement in our organization. The question “Are you proud to work for Pfizer?” received a 95 percent ‘Yes.’ It tells me that our purpose-driven culture is working, and people understand why we are here. Employees are engaged because of this purpose-driven culture. I hope that we will soon see successes from Pfizer and many other biopharmaceutical companies that are working on [COVID-19], because we will need multiple options to battle the coronavirus.

We are all looking forward to the day when we have a vaccine. As one of the largest and most influential pharmaceutical companies globally, what role do you hope to play in advancing and enhancing the overall purpose of the industry? How does that purpose help shape the perception of the industry?
We can play a major role. I see us as equals among many. Like many other companies, we are active in forums within the pharmaceutical industry, and in forums where multiple industries are cross-pollinating, like The Business Roundtable (BRT).

We are playing a positive role. A recent example was the declaration that the BRT made changing the paradigm of a corporation’s purpose. For decades, the purpose of corporations was solely to support the interest of the shareholders; now it is to take care of the interests of multiple stakeholders. We were proud to not only co-sign, but to also take action in this direction. Being able to have the trust of society is extremely important to us, because individuals need to trust us and our medicines to save their lives or their children’s lives or their parents’ lives.

There is nothing that counts more than this trust. We need to make sure that we are part of the community and share transparently with them what we are doing – how we conduct our research and business, how we strategize and plan, and most importantly, how we walk the talk.

Sarah Galloway: Thank you, Albert, for an inspiring and visionary conversation. On behalf of Russell Reynolds and our team, we would like to thank you and your colleagues at Pfizer for everything you currently do for patients out in the world. It has been a pleasure speaking with you.
Thank you very much.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices