Leading in a Fragile World: Three Critical Objectives for the CHRO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Leading In A Fragile World: Three Critical Objectives For The CHRO

Inclusive LeadershipHuman Resources OfficersDevelopment and TransitionExecutive SearchC-Suite Succession

Article

Anna Penfold

May 14, 2020

5 min

Inclusive LeadershipHuman Resources OfficersDevelopment and TransitionExecutive SearchC-Suite Succession

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

CHROs must capture the energy of an organization and work to rearchitect what good leadership looks like.

Close

Anna Penfold

London

As the COVID-19 crisis has progressed, organizations are increasingly thinking about the long-term implications of all that is happening. Will there be permanent changes to attitudes, behaviors and priorities among employees, customers, and partners? And if so, what impact will those changes have on the business and how it operates?

Chief Human Resources Officers are finding themselves playing an increasingly critical leadership role in this changing world. Based on recent conversations with board members and CEOs about the crisis and its longer term implications, as well as perspective from leading CHROs on how they think it will shape their role, we have identified 3 critical objectives CHROs should focus on for long-term success.

(Re)orient externally

If this crisis has made one thing clear about the C-suite, it is that HR cannot be an internally-oriented role. CHROs typically spike on stakeholder management and communication skills, and they must leverage those abilities to build and maintain external networks that enable the organization to respond quickly in future crises. This is not simply a matter of interfacing with relevant government agencies, but also building deep relationships with other organizations in and beyond your value chain.

More so than ever, employees are putting their trust in their employer as a source of high-quality information and advice, and they are also turning to their employer for logistical support (including in the areas of health, travel, and finance). CHROs will need to ensure they and their teams are setup to respond accordingly.

The ability to tap into the expertise and capacity of other organizations can also be critical when a company is faced with workforce outages, expertise gaps, or surges in demand. Organizations should also be prepared to move quickly to provide their own capacity and expertise to others. Many organizations have learned to do this during the crisis, and this now needs to be embedded and maintained as an organizational capability.

The trend of HR as public relations, whereby decisions that affect employees and communications to employees are seen and scrutinized in the public domain, will now be fully mainstream. CHROs must ensure they have built relationships with their organization’s marketing function that go well beyond the basics of employment brand management.

Employee welfare is already a consideration in the burgeoning ESG investing space and has been a nascent trend in the branding and marketing space; it will now likely have a far larger impact on purchasing decisions. CHROs should increasingly expect to act as one of the public faces of the organization in a time of crisis – at a minimum with investors, but possibly also with clients and consumers.

Architect a new approach to leadership

Discussions about purpose have certainly been in vogue for some time now, but how many organizations have truly gone beyond good employment branding and internal comms? When we ask the question “what has this crisis taught you about leaders at your organization?” we consistently hear two things: that many leaders have stepped up in unexpected ways, while others have faltered, and that those that are most effective are marked out by their empathy, humility, and ability to drive action and decision making centered around purpose.

CHROs must capture this energy and work to rearchitect what good leadership looks like. For many that will mean taking on the questions of what is the purpose of the corporation, and whether the well-branded statement of organizational purpose is actually a cultural facet, or just that – a brand statement.

Leading with purpose will enable wider engagement from a diverse stakeholder group and great innovations will come from those who are listening closely to employees, customers and other stakeholders.

Doubling down on “inclusive leadership” should be an important component of any new or evolved approach to leadership. Inclusive leaders excel in four key areas: They bring awareness and clarity to problem areas, they practice courageous accountability to help resolve those problems, they empower others, and they foster innovative collaboration to unlock the unique contributions of each person in a group.

CHROs must move swiftly to embed the best of leadership in organizational culture. Ask yourself the question, have leaders emerged in this crisis who were not on succession plans, or likely wouldn’t have been the next pick for a big job? If the answer is yes, then its time to revisit and possibly redesign the language, frameworks and processes that drive leadership progression decisions.

Double down on organizational design

Emergency workforce planning has been an essential part of crisis management. The art of organizational design will be a critical capability as the dust settles and organizations focus on two questions: what do our customers want and need? And what do our employees want and need?

After this current crisis subsides, organizational design will sit at the intersect of commercial survival and the employer’s responsibility to its employees. CHROs will need to respond to new organizational objectives and adapt the design of the organization accordingly. This will involve decisions about:

What are our current and emerging critical skill sets and roles?

The skill sets of the existing employee base as well as skill availability, cost and access in the labor market will all be factors in determining the right mix between hiring and development. Worth noting that reskilling existing employees, an increasingly common topic over the last few years, should be a critical consideration on two fronts: firstly it enables you to leverage your cultural DNA and the engagement capital you have built, and secondly, redundancies will cast a long shadow that will affect your brand with employees, consumers, and other stakeholders.

Where and how can work happen?

Many organizations have discovered that they can work in a virtual environment far more effectively than they thought. There is also a burgeoning sense amongst HR leaders that many employees may not want to return to the office, or certainly not full-time. Real estate portfolios will need to be reviewed, but more importantly remote working options open new talent pools and also require different approaches to collaboration and keeping team members connected to the organizational culture. In sectors where workers must be physically present to do their jobs like manufacturing, retail, construction and logistics the social distancing, safety and related measures put in place during the crisis may either need to be made semi-permanent, or will have created new expectations from employees that are hard to undo.

Who are our employees?

The issue of responsibility to and management of individuals that supply labor and expertise but are not permanently employed is and will continue to be an important one for companies to manage, both as they think about maximizing their talent base and the broader perception of how they treat their workforce. Additionally, though many organizations will be faced with an acute commercial challenge related to distressed suppliers and need to move quickly to secure the critical capability and talent that sits within its supply chain. CHROs will have an important role to play here in driving decision making about acquisition and integration.

Additional Authors

Tom Handcock is the global head of Knowledge Management at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in London.

Leading In A Fragile World: Three Critical Objectives For The CHRO

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices