The Rules Have Changed: CEOs, Here’s How to Land a High-Impact Marketing Officer | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Rules Have Changed: CEOs, Here’s How to Land a High-Impact Marketing Officer

Customer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationChief Executive OfficersCustomer Activation and GrowthDevelopment and Transition

Article

December 09, 2025

6 min

Customer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationChief Executive OfficersCustomer Activation and GrowthDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

CEOs seeking to drive sustainable growth and competitive advantage need to consider the new CMO profile for 2026 and beyond.

Close

Jennifer Doidge

San Francisco

Greg Hodge

London

No longer a pure brand steward or a performance ninja, the modern chief marketing officer is an architect of enterprise-wide growth and customer connection. These leaders must merge right brain storytelling with left brain growth strategies, all while driving holistic technology implementation.

After working with hundreds of organizations over the last twelve months and leveraging technology platforms to assess just as many job descriptions we have identified the key competencies for modern, effective CMOs.

Here’s what CEOs seeking to drive sustainable growth, innovation, and competitive advantage need to consider about the new CMO profile for 2025 and beyond.

The resurgence of brand: Merging brand expertise with commercial performance acumen

The era of the “performance-only” marketer is over. While the past decade saw a heavy emphasis on short-term, performance-driven tactics, many organizations have recognized the limitations of this approach. Over-reliance on digital performance marketing led to diminishing returns, increased price sensitivity, and eroded brand equity. In response, CEOs are gravitating towards CMOs who can balance both long-term brand-building and short-term performance marketing. 95% of the job descriptions we analyzed asked for both performance and brand marketing expertise.

The most effective marketing leaders are those who can drive immediate results through performance channels, while simultaneously investing in brand equity that contributes to both short and long-term growth. Research shows that companies balancing both approaches outperform those focused solely on short-term gains  . For example, after suffering diminishing returns from a performance marketing-let strategy, Airbnb saw an increase of ~20% traffic when they shifted to an investment in brand.

While the art of brand-building has been forgotten as of late, growth in today’s economic environment requires refocusing on brand as a long-term asset, while also delivering immediate performance.

Talent Implication

Seek CMOs with a proven track record in both brand stewardship and performance marketing. Mostly importantly, they need to understand how to integrate these disciplines for maximum impact.

Building effective teams: Leveraging technology and structuring for growth

Modern marketing teams are dynamic, tech-enabled, and strategically structured. The CMO’s ability to build and lead such teams is now a core competency. High-performing teams have reached across the martech stack—blending creative, analytical, and technical talent—to include roles in content strategy, demand generation, lifecycle marketing, product marketing, and data analytics.

Models with hybrid or matrix structures that combine centralized strategy with decentralized execution are gaining popularity, as they deliver both agility and consistency. AI, automation, and advanced analytics are embedded into team workflows, enabling hyper-personalization, efficiency, and data-driven decision-making. These complex leadership dynamics require CEOs to bring in marketing leaders who have experience leading and developing cross functional teams. Over 90% of the job descriptions we assessed required experience leading and developing teams.

The most impactful CMOs are not just team builders; they are talent incubators, developing future marketing and business leaders.

Talent Implication

Prioritize CMOs who have built, structured, and scaled high-performing, tech-enabled marketing teams that drive both innovation and growth.

The commercially driven CMO: Connecting marketing to revenue growth

The modern CMO is both a growth architect and a brand steward. Today’s most successful organizations are asking marketers to look beyond awareness or engagement metrics and also be directly accountable for business outcomes.  CMOs must have a proven ability to connect marketing activities to revenue growth, profitability, and shareholder value.

The most effective CMOs drive alignment with their CFO and C-suite peers around metrics such as customer lifetime value, ROMI, and brand equity. According to Deloitte, organizations with strong CMO-CFO collaboration are significantly more likely to achieve above-average revenue growth however, only 33% of sitting CMOs prioritize profitability as a KPI. While 100% of the job descriptions we analyzed noted the importance of revenue growth, 85% included a connection to revenue growth as a core competency for the CMO.

Talent Implication

Insist on commercially driven CMOs who can demonstrate a track record of tying marketing investments to measurable business results and who are fluent in the language of finance and growth.

Implementation of AI and new technology: Driving measurable value

AI and new technologies are now table stakes for marketing leadership. According to the RRA Global Leadership Monitor, marketing leaders are ahead of their C-Suite peers in terms of AI adoption and implementation. 87% of marketing leaders surveyed suggested that they had a strong understanding of the implications of Generative AI and the skills needed for future c-suite members to leverage the technology effectively. Also, over half of marketing leaders surveyed have implemented or are piloting AI programs.

AI enables faster content creation, deeper insights, and automation of repetitive tasks, marketing teams are getting time back for more strategic work. Two years ago, we barely saw any mention of AI in job specs or dialogues with clients. Today it’s become central to CMO hiring criteria.

Of course, AI’s impact on marketing is not one size fits all—implementation progress varies widely.

Talent Implication

Select CMOs who are not only comfortable with technology but have a proven ability to implement AI and martech solutions that drive bottom-line growth and competitive differentiation.

The rise of the “CMO+”: P&L ownership and business partnership

The CMO role is expanding into a true enterprise leadership position. The “CMO+” is a business partner who  collaborates across functions, may manage a P&L, and, is increasingly seen as a pipeline to the CEO seat.  Modern CMOs who have owned and managed revenue and profit outcomes, not just marketing budgets, bring a strategic lens to revenue growth .  This new responsibility is additive to the marketing function and should not be at the cost of customer-centric, tech-enabled growth.

The CMO+ works closely with sales, product, finance, and technology, driving growth across the organization. As companies prioritize customer-centric growth and digital transformation, the CMO+ profile is increasingly becoming an  archetype for future CEOs.

Talent Implication

Look for CMOs with operational credibility, P&L experience, and a demonstrated ability to act as a business partner, these leaders are best positioned to drive enterprise-wide growth and may well be your company’s next CEO.

The CMO job specification in 2025 is not just a checklist—it’s a blueprint for business growth and transformation. CEOs who recognize and act on these new requirements will unlock the full potential of marketing as a driver of revenue, innovation, and enterprise value. Those who do not risk falling behind in a marketplace where the pace of change is only accelerating.

Going forward CMO roles are shaped by a mandate for digital analytics and leadership, seamless integration of brand and performance marketing, a relentless focus on transformation and agility, and the ability to drive cross-functional, commercially minded collaboration to deliver both growth and brand equity.

Authors

Jennifer Doidge leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Chief Marketing Officers practice in North America and is a leader in the Global Customer Activation & Growth practice. She is based in San Francisco.
Greg Hodge leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ European Customer Activation & Growth practice in Europe and is a member of the firm’s Global Marketing Officers practice. He is based in London.
Amanda Callahan leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Commercial Strategy and Insights for the firm’s Global Customer Activation & Growth practice.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Online Grocery Spiked During COVID-19. What Now?

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices