Redesign Your Hamster Wheel in 2026 | Russel Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Redesign Your Hamster Wheel in 2026

“There’s something happening here, what it is ain’t exactly clear…”~ “For What it’s Worth,” Stephen Stills

Everywhere I went in December, I encountered business leaders gasping towards the holiday finish line. 2025 was a challenging and stressful year. Witnessing a global order that’s been relatively stable for the last 70 years take a beating created all kinds of uncertainty. It’s impossible to know in what ways and at what speed artificial intelligence will change how we work and the work we do. But it will and it’s here, adding a huge layer of complexity and ambiguity onto our already complicated lives as leaders.

We used to comfortably measure change in decades. The conservatism of the 1950s and 1980s gave way to the creative innovation of the 1960s and 1990s. But in the world we’ve entered, the volatility and speed of events will have us managing a decades-worth of change annually. I will remember 2025 as the year that the US military’s concept of VUCA fully manifested – the moment we’re living and leading through is truly volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous.

From the dozens of conversations I had with CEOs, senior leaders, and boards late in 2025, one observation stands out: businesses of all stripes are struggling to deliver the results their best-laid plans were designed to produce.

As leaders, it’s our responsibility to bind together an organization’s people and resources to produce a desired result—and how we’ve been doing that is no longer working. It’s one of the big reasons we’re all so tired. The hamster wheel we’re running on is no longer producing the desired results.

Operating Model

I’ve heard the wheel – a company’s process for turning strategy into results – described in many ways: operating model, system, cadence, the how, structure, governance, etc. However you talk about yours, it is some combination of ensuring you have the right capabilities and effective processes for:

Setting direction

Allocating capital

Defining key initiatives

Reviewing progress and making adjustments throughout the life of those projects

Decision-making

Performance management

Identifying and developing talent

Clear and cogent communications to the organization

The operating system you work within should be designed in alignment with, and in service of, your business model and strategy. As strategy becomes more fluid and changeable in the disruptive 2020s, we must be more proactive in evolving how we lead and operate. A lot of companies and teams are running on a hamster wheel that was constructed in the wake of COVID. And while it may have been well-suited to that unique moment, it’s failing us now.

Our response to this VUCA world cannot be run faster! The smarter choice? Get off the wheel; examine it anew in context of your ambitions, current reality, and strategy; and then, reimagine and redesign.

Principles > Best Practices

In my experience, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to operating a complex enterprise or engaging, aligning, and empowering an organization. The best answer in business, just as in life is: it depends.

Great leadership is always contextual and situational, so what works will vary. But if leading through the volatility of 2025 taught me anything, it’s this: leaders and organizations have to become masters of experimentation, testing-and-learning new approaches continuously. What works today may get wobbly tomorrow.

I wish I could provide you useful details on how to conduct an effective operating review or better integrate strategy development and capital allocation. I’ve seen practices that work brilliantly for a particular business or team but, given the uniqueness of your own context and situation, your strengths and weaknesses as a leader, and the dynamism of the marketplace, I doubt describing them would provide you much value.

So instead of talking about specific approaches, let’s focus on some principles that can anchor effective operating models in 2026.

The Oxford Dictionary defines a principle as: a fundamental truth or proposition that serves as the foundation for a system of belief or behavior or for a chain of reasoning. I’ve become a big fan of using principles to guide the thinking and actions of a team or organization.

I learned the power of principles from Kevin Johnson during his tenure as CEO at Starbucks. Kevin is one of most strategic leaders I’ve ever seen close-up. He formulated the “Growth at Scale” strategy, and it fueled global growth, enhanced customer experience, delivered new innovation, and grew Starbucks’s market cap by more than $30B during his tenure.

Kevin believes that articulating clear principles gives leaders and managers the freedom to do what’s right while ensuring that their efforts are aligned with enterprise strategy. Clear, cogent, and compelling principles empower your people, giving them agency to unleash their leadership while ensuring alignment.

As you reimagine and redesign your operating model for this VUCA moment, use these three principles as a compass and measuring stick. They will help you meet the moment.

Principle 1: Create Clarity

We’re all walking briskly in the fog—it’s hard to see the horizon, let alone anticipate how events around us will unfold. No one knows what the world is going to look like next year at this time. The collapse of the planning horizon is creating a crisis of clarity and, unfortunately, as human beings we are wired to pour our fears into an information vacuum. Failing to communicate clearly exacts a cost as people shadow box with their fears and focus their attention inward, increasing friction across organizational boundaries. Both hamper quality and productivity.

Sharpen your focus, choices, and messaging. Ensure senior leadership is speaking with one voice about your enterprise ambitions, as well as the current (and future) realities in your marketplace. Get real about your organization as well. You can’t afford to believe the myths—your operating system will fail if designed for capabilities or a culture you don’t have. Ensure your operating model creates forums for leaders to talk about what stands in the way of execution.

Design an operating model that continually creates clarity for the organization.

Now is not the time to be sloppy in communicating strategy—you need more than a PowerPoint deck offering broad notions of strategy and financial targets. What’s required now is a clear, cogent, and compelling story about your strategy and a strategic plan that lets the organization understand what must happen, by whom, by when and why. Make sure that senior leadership is collectively and continuously telling the same story. Just as boats use horns in a fog, we need to use our collective voices to lead loudly.

Principle 2: Manage More, Plan Less

When I started working with executive teams more than thirty years ago, it was common for companies to develop five or even 10-year strategies. Today, planning with those time horizons is magical thinking. Dwight D. Eisenhower famously said, “Plans are worthless, but planning is everything.” Planning helps you think through options, determining and articulating critical work. But don’t spend too long on the planning process or your assumptions may be outdated by the time you begin to execute.

Instead, put more time and energy into ensuring a robust management process that brings together those responsible for execution with those responsible for strategic direction. Make sure they’re talking. Look at the quality and output of your team or organization as part of a disciplined review process, analyzing data, and understanding the stories about what happened and why. Make sure these insights inform your strategy and the execution engine. Integrate test-and-learn – trying things out to identify what works and what can scale – into your concept of planning.

Design an operating model with a disciplined “plan-do-reflect” cycle and helps maintain the conditions for candor.

Don’t forget that the effectiveness of your operating model is predicated on a culture of candor which allows the flow of information, insights, and ideas without friction, dilution, or fiction. Unfortunately, candor is a challenge for too many teams and organizations. And really, this isn’t all that surprising; adding uncertainty and stress onto a hierarchical political system is not a great recipe for creating the psychological safety.

Your hamster wheel is not just decision-rights and meeting cadence – it’s also about how people interact. Your operating system should help build trusting, collaborative relationships across teams, units, and silos.

Principle 3: Elevate Leadership

Leadership is the essential ingredient to enterprise success—and making sure it’s focused on the right things is mission critical. In a hyper-competitive VUCA world, leaders need to spend a hell of a lot more time making sense of things, observing the shifting winds and figuring out how to understand, adapt, and navigate. Setting direction and strategy is requiring more time and energy which means enterprise leaders need to get out of the weeds by empowering others to do more.

Leverage your operating model to distribute leadership: engaging, aligning, and empowering next generation talent to get critical work done. Enterprise leaders can only elevate by tapping into more of your organization’s capacity. Next generation leaders bring creativity and more native experience with new technologies – integrating these capabilities with the wisdom and pattern recognition of senior leadership will give you a faster path to the future.

Design an operating model that effectively distributes leadership, freeing up enterprise leaders to make sense of a changing world, set direction, and create the conditions for business success.

You can effectively empower – sharing responsibility and authority with the next layer of leadership – by creating new mechanisms to be informed, provide input, or make certain decisions throughout the lifecycle of an initiative. A good operating system should help you mix the various strengths and perspectives at every level powerfully and effectively.

Beyond strategy, enterprise leaders are also responsible to create the conditions for enterprise success. John Gibson, the brilliant CEO of Paychex, taught me that executive leaders need to work on the business, not in the business. Your operating model must enable senior leadership to gain an elevated and complete perspective of your business, organization, and talent, operating at an enterprise level while ensuring accountability for results.

An operating system that doesn’t foster a performance culture is impotent. We’re entering an era where organizations won’t be able to afford mediocre talent – as AI inevitably reduces the number of necessary employees, the ones remaining better be strong performers. The operating model must help create clarity, candor, and consequences to fuel accountability.

A New Year’s Resolution

A few years ago I adopted the mantra: If I’m doing tomorrow what I did yesterday, I’m probably doing it wrong. It was meant to help me respond to our changing world, recognizing that intentional adaptation is critical to on-going career success. One of my New Year’s resolutions is to redesign the hamster wheel my business uses to produce results, boldly questioning how we run things, where I focus my time and attention, and how we create the conditions for success. Guided by the three principles of Create Clarity; Manage More, Plan Less; and Elevate Leadership, we will test-and-learn our way to successfully navigating this next transformative year.

I hope you find success in 2026 doing the same.

Author

Bob Marcus is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in New York.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices