CHRO Radar: The View from India | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CHRO Radar: The View from India

Conversation with Vinita Katara, Leadership Advisor at RRA.

CONNECT WITH OUR EXPERTS

Across the world, business leaders are increasingly concerned  with ensuring they have the right expertise to drive their organizations forward. Our most recent Global Leadership Monitor (H2 2024) reveals that 57% of global business leaders see the availability of key talent/skills as one of the top five greatest threats to their business in the next 12 to 18 months. It’s perhaps one reason why CHRO turnover has declined globally over the past year.

Clearly, organizations are relying more than ever on their CHROs—and prizing experienced leaders to navigate an increasingly uncertain operating environment.

But do these global trends reflect what’s happening in India right now? How does the situation differ—and why? To get the local context, we sat down with Russell Reynolds Associates’ Vinita Katara.

Vinita, what’s the market like in India right now?

Given that GDP growth has been steady for the past few years, the economic outlook in India has been positive. There has been robust growth across manufacturing and services. As a result of which, the need for talent continues. The government policy has played a pro-economy role causing resilience and independence. India ranks much higher on “ease of doing business” index by the World Bank. The government policies, coupled with the thrust on digitization make it an attractive market for FDI (foreign direct investments) and FPI (foreign portfolio investment) inflows.

So what impact is that having on the talent landscape?

Given steady growth and positive market indicators, there has been robust demand of talent across manufacturing and services sectors. Apart from traditional businesses, there has equally been a surge in the startup economy, with the country being home to much over 100 unicorns.

Whilst there is need for talent across various industries, as well as types of companies i.e. startups, Indian companies, and MNCs,  the talent landscape has been going through transformation – with AI adoption, focus on upskilling, and digitizing of businesses.

Companies are focusing on skill based hiring – where we are seeing significant opportunity for Digital / tech talent that will pave the way for future growth / transformation. This talent finds equal demand in traditional and tech-enabled startup businesses.

Equally, a large number of Global Capability Centres (GCCs) are being established in India today. These Centres are becoming the nucleus of specialized talent for large global corporations – thus driving business efficiencies and growth for MNCs – from India.

Additionally, India is paving the way for energy transition – thus sectors such as renewable energy, electric mobility, automotive are seeing growth with an emphasis on specialized talent that can help with the energy transition agenda for these businesses as well.

All in all, the need for talent is high and the opportunities are not only creating a positive employment outlook for local talent, but also for the Indian diaspora globally that may consider returning to India during this phase of growth.

What does all of this mean for the CHRO market?

Given the growth / evolution phase organizations are in, the CHRO’s role has evolved into a highly strategic one with significant emphasis on enabling organization growth by attracting the right talent, reimagining organization structures, and the use of technology and the role that will play in the future of the workforce.

An important topic that is on the minds of most of our clients is upskilling their workforce i.e. making the organization future ready. How is technology like AI going to change the makeup of your workforce in the future? What talent or skills are you going to need five years from now? How do you continue to sustain growth not just during the growth phase, but in your sustenance phase?

Similarly, as most organizations are reimagining their businesses, the role of the CHRO is critical in creating a value proposition for attracting talent high in demand to their organizations. Thus factors that come into play are attracting the Indian diaspora/expats into the country. Specially in roles related to manufacturing, R&D, etc.

Talent Acquisition is a key agenda item for CHROs today. However the contours of acquiring talent are changing – there is an emphasis on strategic talent acquisition – anticipating what the organization may need a few years down the line and how that will influence the talent strategy today,

These are the big questions every organization is facing right now. Therefore the need is for a seasoned, strategic CHRO who can think five to seven years ahead, and challenge status quo.

But if everyone’s looking for an experienced CHRO, are there enough to go around?

In one word: no. As you’d expect, the pool of experienced CHROs is small. And if you’re looking for someone with experience  in a specific domain or sector, then that pool becomes smaller. So in order to get a seasoned CHRO, you may need to look further afield, beyond your own industry or sector.

Whilst hiring a tried-and-tested CHRO with a proven track record may feel safer than taking a chance on a first-timer, it’s also important to consider the knock-on effect on innovation, diversity of thought, and out of the box thinking. Put simply, by hiring a safe pair of hands, could you  be stifling someone who could bring fresh ideas and new ways of doing things? Some organizations have also brought in business leaders who have a penchant for talent, into the role of the CHRO. The idea is for this leader to marry the business agenda with the talent agenda seamlessly.

There’s no simple, one-size-fits-all answer. Every organization will need to work this out for themselves, in their own context.

So what should organizations be doing to get their HR function future-ready?

Focus on leadership that drives innovation and diversity of thought. There needs to be a strong emphasis on developing the HR function in a way that it is positioned to prepare the organization for its future.

Equally important is prioritizing your CHRO succession planning. How can you help your CHRO to equip the people immediately under them—or what we call the n minus one layer—with the requisite skills and experience to step into the role of CHRO when their time comes.

One way we do that is by using our Leadership Span methodology to help potential CHROs of the future map out their professional development journeys, and develop the skills they’re going to need to be ready to lead that future version of their organization.

Typically, you’ll see that people at this talent level have spikes in certain areas of HR: business partnering, learning & development, compensation & benefits, and so on. So, how can organizations proactively rotate its talent across various subfunctions of HR, thus preparing them for a generalist management role in the future.

Authors

Vinita Katara is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Corporate Officers and Social Impact and Education Practices.

Sources

1 RRA Global Leadership Monitor – H2 2024
2 RRA Global CHRO Turnover Index

CHRO Radar: The View from Asia Pacific

Explore more

Speak to a consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices