Purpose-Driven Leadership: Fireside Chat with Clarke Murphy and Hubert Joly | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Purpose-Driven Leadership: Fireside Chat with Clarke Murphy and Hubert Joly

Leadership StrategiesCustomer Activation and GrowthLeadershipConsumerTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryDevelopment and TransitionInclusion and Culture

Article

Clarke Murphy

May 21, 2021

5 min

Leadership StrategiesCustomer Activation and GrowthLeadershipConsumerTechnologyBoard and CEO AdvisoryDevelopment and TransitionInclusion and Culture

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The former Best Buy CEO explains how a people-centric solution helped lead the consumer technology giant’s dynamic turn around from near bankruptcy.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

As a hard-charging McKinsey consultant, Hubert Joly created a career that many would instantly deem a success. He earned a good salary, worked on meaningful projects, and took on significant responsibilities.

What Joly lacked, though, was a genuine purpose.

“Sometimes you reach the top of the first mountain and find it empty,” he said.

By the time Joly took over the then-ailing Best Buy in 2012, he was ready to fully tap into the necessity of purpose-driven leadership. This philosophy, along with empathy, a people-centric approach, and a desire to grow as a leader, underpinned his success in saving the iconic American electronics from near bankruptcy. Through this approach, Joly revitalized the Best Buy brand, re-established it as a leading electronics retailer, and saved thousands of jobs while tripling the stock price in a little more than a year.

Joly joined Russell Reynolds Associates CEO Clarke Murphy on May 13 for an online fireside chat with more than 1,200 registrants from across the globe to discuss purpose-driven leadership. For Joly, the discussion allowed him to talk about his career path, how he turned around Best Buy’s business a decade ago, and how he puts people first when he leads.

Here are some insightful points Joly made about leadership during the hour-long conversation.

Don’t be afraid to ask for help. “Hi, my name is Hubert, and I need help.” Joly joked that this statement is one of his most-used favorite sayings and the reason is simple: He doesn’t know everything and doesn’t feel that he needs to.

“Early in my career, I wanted to be the person with all the answers,” Joly said. “As I continued along my leadership journey, I learned that there were only certain things I had true power over. My job was to create an environment for those with the answers to feel empowered to share them.”

Joly said that as a CEO, certain responsibilities fell under his direction – creating a long-term business strategy, making key people choices, nurturing culture, and approving major investments and transactions, among others – but many did not require his seal of approval. His duty was to manage the obligations under his purview, make himself available to those who needed him, and not serve as a roadblock for those looking to get things done.

Stick with your principles. To find true meaning in work, Joly called on attendees to share with him what gives their work meaning. While it may be difficult, especially for those early or mid-way through their careers, “you must define your principles and stick to them,” he said.

Too often, Joly said, people let factors like money or increased responsibility drive their careers, but those motivations do not lead to long-term satisfaction. Joly pointed to the advice he received from two influences that guided his thinking.

The first was a client from his time at McKinsey who told him the purpose of a company is not to make money. Rather, profit is an imperative and an outcome, as the financial success of the business is a derivative of the ability to have great employees who make customers happy. But the ultimate goal has to be to contribute to the common good.

The second piece of advice came from two monks who asked Joly to write about work. Together they concluded that modern work is part of our quest for more significant meaning in life and to create a common good.

It is with these ideas that he remade his career, focusing on the principles he valued most. This advice he gives executives today: “Figure out what you stand for and either be an agent for change at your company to make it happen or find another firm that shares your values.”

Life is short, and the world is a large place.

Focus on people-centric solutions first. As Joly set out to rebuild Best Buy, which was struggling to compete with Amazon and new retail stores from technology providers such as Apple, Microsoft, and Sony, he believed the answers to his problems were his organization’s people.

“Whenever a company is in trouble, the advice is to cut, cut, cut,” Joly said. “When I took over at Best Buy, our stores were profitable. It was talking to the employees where I found the answers. They know what is going on. Yes, there will be parts of the business where cuts can be made but headcount reduction should be the last resort.”

Joly shared a story about the week he spent in a Best Buy in St. Cloud, Minnesota, talking with customers, floor workers, and local management. He quickly saw that Best Buy’s challenges were self-inflicted: Prices were too high, customer service had declined, and the online experience was lacking.

Joly noticed that customers wanted a brick-and-mortar place to see high-end electronics in person and ask questions. At the same time, vendors needed a space to show off their latest and most extraordinary developments.

While many aspects went into Best Buy’s turnaround the message was clear. Listen to the people doing the work, let them know they were heard, empower them to make a change, and encourage them to dream big.

Always listen to criticism and use it for personal growth. Even when Best Buy was rapidly growing again, Joly found himself receiving feedback on areas to improve. His initial thought was to reject that criticism, using his success to brush away any negative comments.

After a bit of reflection, though, he came to an exciting conclusion: They were right.

“Just as I work with a tennis coach to improve my forehand, I realized how an executive coach could help me improve my leadership,” Joly said. Part of that journey included reverse mentorship, where Joly met with junior associates of the company to learn about issues and experiences he was not familiar with. That included a complicated discussion about the challenges Black employees and customers faced living in the United States – something Joly, a native of France, had not grown up with.

The lesson: Embrace your perceived shortcomings to improve yourself.

Be transparent every step of the way. Joly joked that, early in his career, he wanted his board to support him and not get in the way. He later realized that this was a missed opportunity. So, to best work with his board – and any other company stakeholders – Joly aimed to be as transparent as possible, even when it came to bad news. He wanted to be able to ask his board members for their advice – part of his goal to continually improve.

More broadly, he wanted those engaged in the company’s success to know where things stood. He knew the employees understood how the business indeed operated. As a manager, Joly wanted to be honest with them about the situation and the path forward, listen to their ideas, and make sure they felt heard.

He wanted to put aside ego to create an environment where everyone one could grow.

It was these principles that drove his career. Future leaders, Joly said, need to find theirs, by “using your brain, eyes, ears, hands, heart, and soul.” Following them will bring work worth celebrating.

For more about Hubert Joly and his leadership principles, read his new book, “The Heart of Business, Leadership Principles for the Next Era of Capitalism.”

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices