Enhancing New Director Performance and Impact | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Enhancing New Director Performance and Impact

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

July 10, 2018

5 min

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair Search

Executive Summary

​Our survey found that many companies are not investing heavily enough in their director onboarding processes.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Our survey of more than 160 new directors representing over 100 Fortune 500 companies found that many companies are not investing heavily enough in their director onboarding processes. We reveal the most significant pitfalls and five ways companies can build more successful programs.

Boards are increasingly seeking to diversify their membership and draw on expertise from a wider variety of sources. As a result, they find themselves with an exceptional number of new—and often first-time—directors. While the need to acclimate new directors may occur only sporadically, getting it right can be essential to the effectiveness of a board. In a past Russell Reynolds Associates research project, we interviewed new directors based in the UK and learned that it takes them about six board meetings to come up to speed. Given that UK boards typically meet relatively frequently, for US-based companies that translates into more than a year of lost time before new directors are contributing at the level they should.

In response to numerous inquiries from corporate boards about how to effectively integrate new board directors, we launched a research project to learn more about director onboarding practices across Fortune 500 companies. With responses from more than 160 directors representing over 100 Fortune 500 companies, the research shows that many boards are not investing heavily enough in integrating their new members.1 Few companies tailor their onboarding process, despite the wide range of experiences and tenures new directors bring. Just 24 percent of directors said they had experienced customized onboarding, compared to 58 percent who went through a standardized program.

We believe that boards can increase the effectiveness of new directors by investing in modular onboarding content that they assemble in different ways to meet the varying needs of new members and then deliver over an extended period of time. We also see an opportunity to elevate the onboarding process to more senior levels, with greater involvement from tenured independent directors. As part of the onboarding process, we see board mentoring—along with coordinated welcoming efforts by all directors—as an important means of efficiently integrating new board members.

In this paper, we will discuss five key elements that will help companies build successful director onboarding programs.

1 Russell Reynolds Associates fielded a survey in the spring of 2018 that received responses from 161 new directors, 20 percent of whom were first-timers and 80 percent of whom were experienced directors. Seventy-six percent had board leadership duties.

01. Personalize the process and experience

Many companies have become more intentional about assembling a wide range of perspectives in the boardroom, appointing directors who are seasoned general managers, experienced leaders in adjacent industries and experts in other areas such as digital transformation or international business. One of the most striking findings from our survey was that despite this diversity of backgrounds, most directors—nearly 60 percent of them—received a standardized onboarding process. Fewer than a quarter of new directors had a customized onboarding process and—most surprisingly—almost a fifth had no formal onboarding at all.

The data also showed a lack of consistent onboarding programs for committees. Fewer than half—47 percent—of directors received onboarding for specific committees. Among those who received committee onboarding, about half of the programs were for the audit committee, 30 percent were for the compensation committee and 11 percent were for the nominating and governance committee, with the balance for others.

In our view, boards have an opportunity to accelerate new directors’ performance by investing more heavily in customized onboarding experiences and processes. To enhance director impact, we believe each company should have a standardized core and then create modular add-ons to meet the specific needs of different directors. A first-time director may need a basic introduction to board protocols and norms, for example, while a director from a different industry may need an orientation to sector-specific metrics and jargon. Additionally, the onboarding program should be heavily focused on getting to know all the other board members and all members of senior management, as well as becoming familiar with the business. The onboarding process also can and should include site visits to key facilities, with opportunities to observe operations and meet employees, as well as a current analysis of the competitive landscape. While directors will undoubtedly do their own due diligence before accepting a board position, a robust and thoughtfully designed onboarding program will help them put what they learned into context.

Companies will also want to think about how they pace the orientation. Rather than a one-off event that requires cramming large amounts of information into a short time span, we suggest spreading out the modules over six to nine months to allow the knowledge to grow in context.

02. Create a board-led process

According to our survey, the board secretary is the person most likely to be accountable for onboarding programs, leading the process for 44 percent of new directors. Independent chairs and lead directors rarely have such a prominent role; only 12 percent of new directors cited them as heading up onboarding (only slightly more than the percentage of directors who were responsible for finding their own way).

In our view, effective director onboarding points to reversing these numbers: The independent chair, lead director or chair of the nominating and governance committee should own the onboarding process, with support from the board secretary or other senior executive. Board leaders can provide greater context and nuance around the board culture and strategy. They also can provide an independent view of the company’s situation that may differ from management’s perspective.

And while board leaders face the most intense responsibilities, we see a role for every director to play in integrating new directors. One basic step is for the lead independent director or nominating and governance committee chair to ask each seasoned director to meet up with the new director for a meal or drinks between meetings, looking for any areas of geographic overlap or common interests.

2 Other includes: CFO and GC; Board committee; CAO; CHRO; Nominating/Governance committee with input from the Board Chair; combination of CEO, Corporate secretary and a board member; General counsel; other members of senior management were responsible for the process; a combination of directors and management.

03. Broaden the pool of people new directors meet

We found that a surprising number of directors had not met with key company leaders during either their interview or onboarding process. Nearly a quarter (24 percent) did not meet with the lead director, and 17 percent did not meet the non-executive chairman, depending on the board’s structure, during either their interview or onboarding process. Thirty-six percent had not met the CHRO, and 53 percent had not met with the head of internal audit.

Looking at the interview process alone, these numbers are not exceptional. It is common that a candidate interviewing for a board position would speak with only the board leaders, the CEO and general counsel. However, in the context of the onboarding process, it’s very surprising that a new director would not meet with the lead independent board member. In light of common issues around company culture and financials, we also find it concerning that new board members do not routinely get to know CHROs or internal audit heads.

In line with our other recommendations, we suggest that the onboarding process include opportunities for new directors to meet with all key leaders (at the board and management levels) in the months after joining. These meetings will give the new directors more exposure to company operations and help them better understand what questions to ask in board meetings.

04. Consider a board mentoring program

By nature, most boards of directors are in the same room only eight to 12 days per year. Many fly in and out of town quickly to attend a board meeting, with little downtime outside the meeting itself. Absent a dedicated effort, it can take a long time for board members to build meaningful relationships with each other. When it comes to integrating new directors, then, boards should not rely on such relationships to develop organically but should instead create an intentional, coordinated process for new members to get to know seasoned ones.

We see board mentoring as a growing trend and effective in many cases. Often, a new director is paired with a tenured director, who checks in with the new director regularly during the first 12 to 24 months. The board mentor helps answer questions on everything from historical context and cultural nuances to confusing terms. The mentor also provides feedback about how the new director can improve his or her contribution. And while these formal aspects typically don’t last beyond two years, the informal aspects can endure far longer.

Currently only 6 percent of new directors have a mentor, according to our survey. Among those who have mentors, the most common benefit cited was insight into board culture. We expect this number to grow, albeit slowly, based on what we are hearing from boards.

05. Improve director feedback

There is room to improve on the feedback given to new directors. Anecdotally, we often hear that board members wonder how they are doing and how other directors perceive their progress. This is likely because they do not routinely get direct feedback: More than half of our respondents—56 percent—did not have a review session with the non-executive chair or lead independent director within their first six months.

Providing direct feedback about where the director has added value or can improve his or her knowledge helps accelerate progress along the learning curve. As onboarding meetings are being scheduled for new directors, board leaders should plan for one-on-one review sessions six to 12 months after a director has been appointed.

In conclusion

As boards continue to look for diverse perspectives, we recommend they invest more in their onboarding programs, making them customized, board led and personally welcoming.

Boards can improve the effectiveness of new directors by:

A strong onboarding program will pay dividends in the quality of the contributions the board offers the company. It can also help the board to focus its collective thoughts and build stronger relationships. When executed well, a strong onboarding program will ultimately lead to the company creating greater value for its shareholders.

Additional Author

Susanne Suhonen is Global Knowledge Leader. Based in London, Susanne works on research projects and advises clients on various topics such as digital transformation, culture transformation and onboarding.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices