APAC FMCG Supply Chain Leaders: No Change in the Past 10 Years | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

APAC FMCG Supply Chain Leaders: No Change in the Past 10 Years

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionLeadershipOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchInclusion and Culture

Article

October 06, 2020

3 min

Inclusive LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionLeadershipOperations and Supply Chain OfficersExecutive SearchInclusion and Culture

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Despite more complex business needs in APAC over the past decade, regional supply chain leaders have not changed.

Close

The last decade has been one of the most dramatic periods of economic growth and transformation, especially in Asia Pacific (APAC) region. The rise of APAC economies and rapid technological advances in various fields such as manufacturing, ecommerce and automation have highlighted the increasing importance of having robust and resilient supply chains in the region. However, despite more complex business needs in APAC over the past decade, regional supply chain leaders have not changed. Companies need to invest in supply chain leadership in APAC to better meet the business requirements.

Positive changes in the last 10 years

YEAR
APAC
EMEA
AMERICAS

2010
12%
25%
63%

2020
40%
10%
50%

40% Local talent representation for senior APAC supply chain leaders has more than tripled in the last 10 years, from 12% to 40% . This is an area of positive change that shows local talents have been given increasing responsibility.

One area of positive change among APAC supply chain leaders is the increase in local talents over the last decade. Despite that, their profiles remain unchanged in professional experiences, background and gender diversity.

Areas which remain unchanged in the last 10 years

>70%

73% of APAC supply chain leaders have been internally appointed; limiting external perspective.

<50%

Less than half of APAC supply chain leaders have multi-functional experience, limiting their exposure in the supply chain field.

<10%

Gender diversity continues to be a big challenge with female supply chain leaders representing 7% of the talent landscape.

>20 years

The depth of experience prior to appointment as APAC supply chain leader remains high at over 20 years, partly reflected by the increasing importance of the role.

<3 firms

Average number of companies APAC supply chain leaders work for in their professional career, limiting their external perspective.

How to Develop the Best Talent in Supply Chain

Companies which invest in supply chain leadership today will significantly outpace competition to win in APAC

Supply chain as a basis for competitive advantage in APAC

Local talent

Identify and accelerate the development of high-potential local supply chain

Multi-industry

Ensure supply chain leaders rotate across categories for broader experience; selectively recruit supply chain leaders from outside of immediate category for infusion of new ideas

Cross-functional

Rotation across R&D, Plan, source, make, deliver, quality as a criteria for supply chain leaders

Proven leadership & depth of experience

APAC SC leadership roles should no longer be seen as step up/development opportunities, but require experienced leaders to manage the scale and complexity

External perspective

Selectively recruit external supply chain or functional leaders for infusion of new ideas

Gender Diversity

Proactively identify and accelerate the development of high-potential female supply chain talent; ensure all external recruitment is sufficiently balanced in terms of gender

APAC is a region of growing importance for global MNCs and its influence will only grow in the following decades with hundreds of millions of new entrants to the ranks of middle class. The investment and development of APAC supply chain leadership today will allow companies to significantly outpace competition to win in APAC. Key areas of developments include having proven leadership and sufficient depth of experience as well as leaders who have multi-industry and cross-functional experience who can provide external perspectives to the company. Finally, the ability to attract diverse talents and local leaders who understand the region well will be critical for the success of MNCs in the future.

Methodology

This study analyzed the evolution of APAC supply chain leaders in FMCG and ingredients companies over the past decade (2010 vs. 2020)
The total sample size of the study consists of 50+ end to end regional and sub-regional supply chain leaders among MNCs in APAC across FMCG and ingredients companies
“External hires” are defined as leaders who were recruited into their current companies within a year of their regional supply chain leadership role
“Primary functional experience” is defined as the functional area in which supply chain leaders have spent more than 75% of their professional career
Both internal proprietary Russell Reynolds Associates data and publicly-available sources were utilized for the study

Author

Lucas Ni is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Corporate Officers practice Knowledge team. He is based in Singapore.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices