Dissecting the Swedish CFO Market: A Conversation with Sophia Nerell | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Dissecting the Swedish CFO Market: A Conversation with Sophia Nerell

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsInclusionSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Interview

Sophia Nerell

July 24, 2024

5 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsInclusionSuccessionFinance OfficersC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Executive Summary

In an interview with Sophia Nerell we dive into the nuances of the Nordic CFO talent market and how to manage CFO turnover.

Close

Sophia Nerell

Stockholm

In today's competitive talent landscape, organizations across the globe are striving to enhance their finance leadership to drive sustainable growth.

With Russell Reynolds Associates’ H1 2024 Global Leadership Monitor finding that 65% of sitting CFOs are very likely/likely to make a career move beyond their current employer today—the highest level of agreement we’ve seen during the three years we’ve tracked CFO talent mobility—mitigating the risk of an unforeseen departure has never been more important.

In addition to global finance leadership trends, the Swedish CFO market presents a unique set of challenges and opportunities. To help Swedish organizations address our current context, we sat down with Sophia Nerell, Managing Director in our Financial Officers Practice in Stockholm, to discuss the nuances of the Swedish CFO market, trends around CFO succession planning, and the key competencies sought by organizations.

Sophia Nerell

Managing Director,

Financial Officers Practice in Stockholm

Can you describe the Nordic market?

Sophia Nerell: The Nordic region is an exciting and dynamic market to be in, with its numerous international blue-chip companies that for many years have developed top-tier finance talent. These companies often have decentralized structures, which tend to foster autonomous, accountable business leaders with a broad skill set. In addition to many high-performing legacy businesses, we are also seeing an ever-growing ecosystem of innovative companies for example in the technology and energy transition sectors, which are rapidly scaling.

The region encompasses four relatively small and narrow geographical markets with distinct cultures, and mobility between these markets is not as prevalent as you might assume. The sector focus also differs between the markets; Sweden takes pride in its many legacy businesses within general industry, automotive, and process industries, whereas Norway excels in energy and natural resources. Finland focuses on forest and other process industries, and Denmark on broader shipping and services.

Tell us about the trends in the Swedish CFO market. What common challenges do organizations face?

Sophia Nerell: First of all—and this is true not just for Sweden and the Nordics, but for the global market—the CFO role is becoming broader and more complex by the day, with increasing demands in areas like ESG reporting, big data, AI, robotics, governance and compliance, risk management, and capital allocation strategies. Today’s CFO is normally viewed as the lieutenant to the CEO; someone who can be a true strategic partner and drive decision-making for both today and the future. The CFO is the Swiss army knife of the leadership team!

As for Sweden, there are some distinct characteristics that organizations need to navigate. First, the market is in constant motion. In our mapping of the 60 largest companies on the NASDAQ Stockholm around half have replaced their CFOs in the last three years and we see similar trends in other segments of the CFO market – all of which limits the supply of CFOs that are open to considering new opportunities.

Further, to minimize risk and ramp-up time, companies are seeking CFOs with experience in their specific industry segment and/or growth stage. The preference for hiring Swedish CFOs to Swedish companies, combined with the limited mobility among Nordic candidates, further constrains a limited CFO talent market and adds complexity to talent acquisition efforts.

Finally, gender diversity remains a notable challenge. From the same analysis, we also found that 100% of the CFOs appointed in 2023 were men – the same being true in 2021 and 2020. Furthermore, women hold only 15% of the NASDAQ Stockholm CFO roles , compared to 26% of the FTSE 100 and 18% of the Euronext 100 CFO roles. While in high demand, women finance leaders are few and far between, often being hired externally as a solution to nascent inclusion and culture efforts to develop finance talent internally.

What does this mean for your clients?

Sophia Nerell: High-performing, broadly skilled CFOs continue to be in demand. There is truly a war for talent out there.

Consequently, CEOs should keep CFO succession top of their minds and work actively on their internal succession agenda together with their incumbent CFO, with support from the Board of Directors, and the CHRO.

While there was an encouraging stream of internal promotions to the CFO role during 2022, we saw a shift in 2023 back to hiring experienced CFOs, with less focus on promoting internal talent. Swedish organizations often perceive their internal bench as insufficiently strong, leading them to rely on external hires for senior positions to hit the ground running. However, this hesitance to consider internal candidates can hinder leadership development, especially for women in finance, and potentially lead to missed opportunities, including positive motivation towards internal talent.

What advice would you give to organizations thinking about their CFO succession planning journey?

Sophia Nerell: Embarking on a CFO succession planning journey requires a proactive and strategic approach. CFO succession planning should ideally start the same day as the new CFO gets appointed, with close CHRO collaboration from the outset.

First, define the CFO success profile, then follow up with an in-depth assessment of the current finance team’s strengths and weaknesses against said success profile.

Post-assessment, outline a carefully curated development plan for the company’s next-in-line internal talent, including regular follow-up and course correction. These could include components such as internal and external mentorship, as well as getting acquainted with key aspects of the CFO job, such as getting Board and capital market exposure early on.

Strengthening the internal bench will help ease apprehensions around internal promotions and, when the day comes, improve the likelihood of a successful transition. This will serve as an important enabler for internal talent retention in an extremely competitive market.

Neglecting CFO succession planning carries many risks for organizations—engaging an experienced partner to meet you where you are in your CFO succession journey can prevent costly business disruptions. For a detailed guide on how to implement CFO succession planning in your organization, read more here: Surviving CFO Turnover: Lessons from Companies that Nailed Succession Planning.

Authors

Mohammed Khan is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Sophia Nerell is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Practice. She is based in Stockholm.
Catherine Schroeder leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Financial Officers Knowledge team. She is based in Toronto.

Sources

RRA Global Leadership Monitor – H1 2024

RRA analysis of the largest companies on the NASDAQ Stockholm by revenue, N=60, 2024

RRA analysis of the FTSE 100 and Euronext 100, N=200, 2024

Dissecting the Swedish CFO Market: A Conversation with Sophia Nerell

Download here

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices