Building a Company’s Post- Bankruptcy Board | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Building a Company’s Post- Bankruptcy Board

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessBoard Director and Chair Search

Article

+ 1 author

April 28, 2020

7 min

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessBoard Director and Chair Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Post-bankruptcy companies typically need to fill the entire board from scratch, including all leadership roles.

Close

Heather Hammond

New York

Curt Ross

Dallas
Houston

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

Steve Morse

Houston

In 2020, the world entered an unprecedented economic era, triggered by a global pandemic and the contemporaneous collapse in commodity prices, demand for certain goods and services, and a breakdown in supply chains. This was further fueled by constraints on productivity and consumerism due to a need to practice social distancing and to shelter in place. The effects of this disruption will be felt for years to come, but we are already seeing a substantial rise in unemployment, mass layoffs and a growing number of corporate bankruptcies and restructurings.

Companies going through restructuring must address several challenges, among them the need to reconstitute their corporate board. This is not an easy task. The normal complexity of director recruitment and onboarding, not to mention the effective implementation of corporate governance practices, is only increased as a result of the company’s legal and financial challenges.

Despite those challenges, however, it is possible to build a strong, highly effective corporate board post-restructuring and to populate that board with well-regarded directors.

This paper is intended to provide a road map for companies to do just that. Our guidance is based on significant experience during the Great Recession and afterward, when we served as a court-approved advisor, assisting companies to reestablish themselves, both in the Southern District of New York and elsewhere. We also recently interviewed several highly-experienced board members, investors and legal professionals who have served on post-bankruptcy boards to learn from their experience and gather their recommendations and best practices.

An urgent but unusual task

The interim management of the company emerging from bankruptcy must work with the creditor committee representing the fulcrum security to reestablish the corporate board. Building a post-bankruptcy board is different in many regards from traditional board director searches. Most frequently, the need is to fill the entire board from scratch, including all board leadership roles. This significantly complicates things. When a board is looking for a single director, they simply need to search for someone with a single set of skills and traits; when filling the full board, one needs to evaluate candidates for every single seat, plus consider how well they will work together and whether their combined strengths and weaknesses complement and balance each other out.

SITUATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND IDEAL PROFILE

INITIAL CANDIDATE IDENTIFICATION

SELECTIVE DISCUSSIONS WITH CANDIDATES

TAKEHOLDER ASSESSMENT OF CANDIDATES

BACKGROUND CHECKS AND PROPOSAL OF DIRECTORS

Traditional director searches are run by sitting board members, individuals who have gone through the process itself (when selected for the board) or who have led the process before (when searching for new directors). For post-bankruptcy boards, however, many of the individuals involved will have no firsthand experience in director recruitment. It is often helpful at the start to educate all involved parties on the overall process and objectives.

A Roadmap To Success

Start early

While building the post-bankruptcy board is an incredibly important task, it is often relegated to the end of the to-do list along with items such as preparing the disclosure statement or negotiating with other classes of creditors. While that is understandable on some level, the end result is that the selection of prospective directors becomes rushed, because all involved parties are tired and ready to wrap up the restructuring. Involved parties end up taking shortcuts: not fully vetting candidates, not finding the best director possible, relying on who knows whom and not on who is best.

Rather than rush the task, companies should start work reconstituting the board early in the restructuring process. When done thoughtfully and carefully, not only are stakeholders better served, but so too are the future board members. They are granted the time to plan the early work of the board, establish relationships with fellow directors and get a strong understanding of the company and its challenges.

Identify a chair

Rebuilding a corporate board starts with identifying a chair who can anchor the board and even help identify and recruit other potential directors. In most cases, the target candidate will be a former CEO who is also an experienced chair or an experienced restructuring professional who has served as board chair during a similar period. This combination of experience enables them to fully advise the CEO and senior leadership team as the company emerges from bankruptcy. Ideally, they are an individual with broad thinking and strong communication skills, enabling them to engage with stakeholders and the market and tell the company story. Lastly, it is critical to ensure they know what they are signing up for when agreeing to take on the chair role. That part is critical, as this role can easily consume 20 to 80 percent of someone’s total work time for a significant period. It is not a minor undertaking.

Determine the optimal size

One important question to answer early: How large should the board be? Aim small. Small boards increase the focus, engagement and accountability of each individual director. So long as you pick the right individuals—those who add value and don’t simply reiterate previously stated points—a small board can have an outsized impact.

Look for the right mix of experiences

The board needs to be filled with strong, capable directors who are comfortable operating in a fishbowl, as public scrutiny of a company is rarely higher than in the year after it emerges from restructuring. A mix of skills and experiences is critical. Former CEOs and CFOs are not only able to give broad, strategic guidance, but can also step in momentarily if the current CEO or CFO resigns or needs to be replaced. Risk management experience, often found in financial services executives, is beneficial too. Board members with backgrounds in restructurings or similar transformations can help if the company needs to rethink its product and service mix as its strength returns. In the current environment, it can be helpful to have one or more board members with experience in government relations.

Be clear on the opportunities - and the risks

The upside of serving on a post-bankruptcy board is that the company will be operating with significantly reduced liabilities, a nimbler organizational structure and a fresh perspective on its strategy and relationship with stakeholders. One potential drawback is that compensation packages can be light on cash. Typically, post-bankruptcy board directors’ compensation consists of a much higher proportion of equity than it would in other circumstances and the equity vests over multiple years. Ensure these terms are a good match for director candidates.

Once the board is selected, it is important that they come together to meet and create a shared understanding of their objectives and end goals. This is also a good opportunity to meet with and assess the CEO and senior executive team—a critical task that the board must undertake quickly, in case leadership changes need to be made.

The behaviors that matter most

Selecting directors with the right skills and backgrounds is critical. On the whole, the board needs to be comprised of experienced leaders who are comfortable making tough calls in challenging situations. Early on, one of their biggest decisions will be to assess and decide on the management team and ensure they are up to the task.

Directors serving on a post-bankruptcy board will work through countless challenges, which demands a considerable time investment. It is critical they be open in their thinking, candid and push back in productive ways against what they consider to be bad ideas or faulty logic. The chair plays an especially important role here, as they must bring everyone together and get the best out of them.
Building a positive, engaging board culture takes work and is the combination of numerous director behaviors. Our research and experience reveal that it does not just happen spontaneously, but rather results from a group of directors intentionally focusing on building a positive culture. Directors on boards with strong cultures work to build— and demonstrate—trust with their peers. They are more open-minded but focused, staying on the matter at hand and eliminating tangents. And they are open to new ideas and ways of doing things.

Specific behaviors for board chairs

Focuses the board’s attention on relevant matters

Encourages independence

Fosters and facilitates high-quality debates

Actively seeks out different points of view

Draws out the relevant experiences of directors

Gives directors constructive feedback

Specific behaviors for board directors

Is open to new ideas and ways of doing things

Is willing to constructively challenge management when it is appropriate

Keeps the discussion focused on the matter at hand and work to eliminate tangents

Builds - and demonstrates - trust among fellow directors

Acts carefully to avoid crossing the line from oversight into operations and management

On boards with strong cultures, directors are deliberate and thoughtful, and they are more likely to constructively challenge executives when appropriate.

Not surprisingly, the board chair plays a vital role in establishing and maintaining a strong board culture, leading the board and facilitating debates. These chairs work to draw out the relevant expertise of every individual director and ensure that the board is conducting robust self-evaluations.

Making an impact

Our research on boards that do the best job focusing on long-term value creation highlighted the importance of understanding director candidate motivations during the recruitment process. Director candidates will ideally express an interest in joining a post-restructuring board out of a desire to make a positive impact. They provide specific skills and experiences to help the company succeed, take a personal interest in the company or the industry and believe in the purpose or mission of the specific organization.

They will also be comfortable with the equity-heavy compensation package and a multi-year vesting schedule. This equity should be tied to long-term value creation, nurturing a shared motivation for directors as well as keeping them focused on a longer-term time horizon.

Moving forward

Assembling a post-bankruptcy board is often left to the last minute, but it shouldn’t be. By starting early, thinking clearly about the structure and composition of the board, and thoughtfully compensating and onboarding directors, companies have an opportunity to build a high-performing board that creates strong positive results for the company and its stakeholders.

Additional Authors

PJ Neal leads the Center for Leadership Insight at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in Boston.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices