Rewriting the Book: Q&A with Luc Hermans | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Rewriting the Book: Q&A with Luc Hermans

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHuman Resources OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

Dana Krueger

May 20, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHuman Resources OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Healthcare Leading Forward Podcast Series:

On and Beyond the Frontlines of Covid-19

Close

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

Luc Hermans is the Leader of the External Coronavirus Response Team at Gilead Sciences. Recently, Luc spoke with Russell Reynolds Associates’ Managing Director and Global Healthcare Sector Leader, Dana Krueger, about recommitting to purpose and focusing challenges and opportunities he sees for healthcare leaders resulting from the current pandemic. The interview presented below has been edited and abridged for clarity.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

Dana Krueger: To kick us off, can you tell us a little bit about the context of your current leadership role at Gilead Sciences?

Luc Hermans: Because of the company’s past work on coronaviruses and the work around remdesivir, we were gearing up to see whether that work could result in a potential treatment for COVID-19. This is when there was a decision taken to bring the various content experts together but also to make sure that we would have someone who could look across the different initiatives and make sure that we had an enterprise-wide lens on it. And that's what I was asked to come and do.

Dana Krueger: How has your background prepared you specifically for this role as the leader of Gilead’s Coronavirus Response Team?

Luc Hermans: So, I'm a physician by training, but I’ve also worked for many organizations as well as in many different parts of those organizations. This has allowed me to get to know more about drug-development organizations and how their work links to the commercial world. I also spent quite a bit of time in different parts of the world, including Japan most recently. I think this range – seeing different environments, different cultures, different functions – is the element of my background that has helped me most in seeing how all these aspects work together in getting to a final goal, which is finding a drug that can deal with a potential problem.

At the same time, nothing is set in stone. I think the coronavirus challenge that we're all dealing with is rewriting the book on many aspects of development. It’s rewriting the book on how you do clinical development and how you look at access to medicines. It's rewriting the book on how you interact with governments and get swift agreements on how to introduce a compound into the market. It's also rewriting the book on how people work together. And yes, you need rules and roadmaps – and drawing on past experiences helps – but more than anything else I think you need to be able to be agile and bold in your decision making as you go forward. It's good to have a diverse background, but it's also good to realize that nothing is set in stone.

Dana Krueger: Can you share with us what the coronavirus’ “rewriting the book” has meant for leadership and your way of working?

Luc Hermans: It all started before I got involved in the project, so I must give a lot of credit to our leadership [at Gilead] and how they looked at this challenge right from the start. For us, leadership has meant, first and foremost, owning up to the reality that this is something that would affect us internally – not just an external problem. I think it's been very important that the people in the company realized that caring about people is important and that we work in a way that reflects that value. So, for example, with the teams in China, Hong Kong and Japan, we clearly and transparently supported their early moves to work from home – not creating some blanket, dogmatic rule, but thinking about a specific situation in the various regions we work with.

Thinking externally, we knew from the beginning that we had experience with coronavirus and we had tested remdesivir in areas such as Ebola, so there are models from what we did in terms of in vitro work that we could say, “this could potentially work!” But this time it is all about speed and agility and being bold and being ambitious. This is where risk-taking in leadership comes into play. Let's not forget that in January and February we didn't know a lot about the disease, so there was a lot of exploratory work to be done, and a lot of risk-taking. We had to make sure that we boldly pursued our plans around clinical, and then try to find the fastest route to regulatory approvals.

Dana Krueger: Beyond clinical, how are you having to think differently about getting the product to market?

Luc Hermans: From a manufacturing point of view, we were sitting on some stocks that we still had from our previous work, but we knew that if the pandemic was going to be of the magnitude that we’re seeing now, we weren't going to meet the demand with the manufacturing capacity we had at the time. Some very bold decisions were taken, communicating the capacity need to senior management and ultimately taking a risk, knowing that the investment in capacity could potentially result in a product that we would not be able to use.

Manufacturing is just one part, however, because it is also about Access of course. We had to identify the steps that we needed to take to make sure that patients could get access to the drug, not only through clinical trials. This meant looking at “compassionate use” and “extended access.” I mean, this is not a normal environment. The demand for this could potentially eclipse the demand for hepatitis C drugs.

Dana Krueger: I’ve heard you talk about the importance of agility, risk-taking, and bold decision-making as key elements of effective leadership in our current environment. Would you say that about sums it up?

Luc Hermans: There’s also the type of leadership that listens and advocates. It is important to make sure that you're listening to what is going on “on the ground”, which is why we are extremely close to our colleagues who work on the front line and to the people who deal with the disease. They can tell us a lot more than what we currently know. When we understand what their needs are, we can make sure that we give them the tools they need to take the next steps. It's not just about developing a compound. If you are a general manager from France or Germany, you get calls from the health ministers of those countries – maybe even the heads of state. As leaders, we all have to make sure that we provide our people with what they need to handle those situations, such as the relevant facts and the most compelling arguments to keep our work moving forward.

It’s also about where these message of support and purpose come from, and how they’re delivered. It’s important that it is the head of commercial, the CMO, the CEO, etc. who are sending these messages. It has to come from the top, and the way they do it sets the tone for others.

Dana Krueger: Thinking about a post-COVID-19 world, what changes within organizations or the industry as a whole will remain? Beyond whatever temporary adaptations have been made, will some transformations endure?

Luc Hermans: For many people, this current crisis has crystallized why they joined the industry in the first place. When we talk about the donations we’re making to ensure access and provide therapies to patients, we get feedback from physicians colleagues saying that this is why they work for our company. Our purpose is becoming clearer than it’s ever been, and that is the belief that the core of what we do is bringing innovation to as many patients as we can.

As far as leadership and the way of working, the crucial nature of teamwork has become apparent. Those people who still believe in silos within organizations had better wake up because it's not the way to tackle big challenges – you have to work as teams. And, again, agility will be key going forward. The norm of being complicated, the norm of heavy organizational layers, the norm of cumbersome processes – that all has to change.

Dana Krueger: What is your hope for what leaders might take away from their experiences in this unusual time?

Luc Hermans: At the end of the day, I hope that everybody takes a step back and asks, “What is really core to what I do? What is my purpose for being in this industry?” The current situation has highlighted the importance of clear focus and efficiency, so leaders have an opportunity to figure out how their leadership can increase the efficiency of their work and ensure that it is more focused on what they’re really all about. For me, that means making sure that we’re driving innovation for patients.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices