The Changed Role of the Chief Procurement Officer | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Changed Role of the Chief Procurement Officer

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationCorporate Affairs and Communications OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersDevelopment and Transition

Article

Pamela Yau

February 21, 2020

4 min

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationCorporate Affairs and Communications OfficersOperations and Supply Chain OfficersDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The best procurement officers go beyond tactical operations and focus on building strong supplier relationships and influencing margins.

Close

Pamela Yau

Singapore

The Changed Role of the Chief Procurement Officer

After decades of focusing exclusively on cutting costs, CPOS are finally coming into their own as valuable contributors to an organization’s overall strategic direction and business growth.

Organizations are now looking for CPOs to deliver value in new ways. Progressive CPOs have expanded their remit from a focus on cost leadership to enabling innovation, agility and supply reliability. Procurement leaders have access to more advanced analytical tools and emerging technologies, raising data-driven decision making to a new level and enabling collaboration at scale. This new leadership is even more critical as organizations face increasing volatility and complexity, including the specter of Brexit and global trade wars.

To further understand their evolving roles, we looked into our proprietary database and analyzed the psychometric data of leading CPOs. Through our Hogan Assessment tool, we uncovered what differentiates top-tier CPOs now and what all CPOs will need to thrive in the future.

Today’s Best-In-Class Procurement Leader

Procurement officers in most large organizations are no longer just tactical operators. The role is increasingly focused on supplier relationships and has shifted from transactional to strategic: influencing margins, shortening time to market and contributing to innovation. CPOs are going beyond a one-on-one relationship with their direct suppliers, and, instead, they have become responsible for developing ecosystems outside their organization.

Given these changed responsibilities, it is not surprising that when we examined the psychometric profiles of best-in-class CPOs relative to other executives, we found leaders who score significantly higher on relationship building, lateral thinking and change management.

Tomorrow’s CPO: New Responsibilities and Opportunities

As the CPO’s mandate continues to evolve and grow, CPOs will soon need new skills to match. The next generation of CPOs will be called upon for innovation, digitalization and to help steer the organization through volatility and complexity. They will continue to demonstrate strategic, innovative, determined and results-oriented leadership traits, as well as further develop their political savvy and influencing skills.

CPOs of the future need the skills to address the following areas:

Innovation

The procurement function is becoming more strategic, and CPOs need to fill those bigger shoes. This means understanding the overall business drivers, having a longer-term view and innovating the way the function is running. Currently, the most common leadership traits in procurement are acting as a role model, collaborating internally and externally to deliver value and delivering results. Conversely, strategic leadership traits such as positive disruption, leading digital transformation and innovation are not commonly found among today’s CPOs but will need to be developed quickly.

“I’m out there looking for ways to keep improving and keep adding value. I spend 25% of my time there speaking with other CPOs, leaders from industry and technology companies, so I can find out how they’re thinking around these challenges and how they’re motivating their teams.”

—Bob Murphy, CPO of IBM

Building ecosystems

Organizations can no longer afford to operate in isolation. Instead, they function as part of an enormous global network. CPOs must navigate a complex web of stakeholders, including suppliers, customers, internal colleagues, and external organizations and partners. The route to sustainable advantage lies in exploiting the strengths and competencies of various stakeholders to achieve greater responsiveness to market needs. As a result, best in-class CPOs have shifted to “systems thinking” and use their skills in relationship building and influencing to partner with suppliers and sometimes even competitors.

Driving sustainability and understanding risk management

Today’s multinational organizations are part of multitiered global supply chains linked together in complex webs of relationships traversing multiple jurisdictions. These intricate networks can mask dangerous vulnerabilities: A problem in one area can quickly ripple up and down the supply chain, leading to severe reputational damage. Companies are also facing a growing number of regulations and an increased awareness among consumers around the sustainability of the goods they buy. Consumers and regulators today hold companies responsible not only for their own practices, but also for those of their suppliers. To meet their demands, CPOs must be prepared to increase transparency of the sustainability and compliance of their suppliers.

Digital advancements

While prospects of a digital transformation in procurement look promising, the reality is that most organizations have not yet captured the opportunities those tools will deliver. Procurement leaders need an understanding of how they can capture the benefits of those new tools for their own functions and across the organization.

Beyond the procurement function, CPOs will increasingly be called upon to enable digital efforts across the organization, including honing an ability to source in-demand digital products like robotics and artificial intelligence.

Future-ready teams

Procurement leaders of the future will need to lead a different type of organization. New technologies could reshape what current procurement teams look like and how the procurement organization is structured. New roles are being introduced to the firm, and talent with an analytical or data science background is entering procurement teams. Unassisted, or cognitive, procurement holds the potential to also replace elements of traditional procurement teams.

The way forward

Embracing the new direction of the CPO is no longer an option due to the competitive forces in every industry today. It is imperative for leaders to assess how they leverage the procurement function and where they are in terms of maturity of the function, as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Transformation of the Procurement Function

CEOs and boards of companies should proactively assess their procurement leaders and broader procurement teams and think about their future pipeline in the short, medium and long term. Ask these key questions:

Does our procurement leader have the necessary skills and capabilities to bring our procurement capabilities to the next level?

Does our organization have the right organizational enablers to ensure the procurement function can transform, including the right digital skills and the right culture to drive adoption?

Do we know the strengths and weaknesses of our current procurement talent pool?

What are the right KPIs for the procurement team going forward?

Leaders who start this process now will be in the best position going forward—able to snatch up the best talent, cultivate the best culture to adopt change and implement new technologies first. The evolving CPO role has already brought significant benefits to companies with the right vision, and the future will be no different as procurement continues to bring in value.

Additional Authors

Marieke Van Der Drift Marieke van der Drift leads knowledge management for Russell Reynolds Associates Operations and Supply Chain practice. She is based in Singapore.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices