DACH Private Equity in Times of Uncertainty Russell Reynolds Associates | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

DACH Private Equity in Times of Uncertainty

Industry TrendsEnvironmental Social and GovernancePortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinancial Services

Article

March 31, 2020

5 min

Industry TrendsEnvironmental Social and GovernancePortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinancial Services

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

ESG remains an ever-growing area of interest with the emergence of funds focused entirely on companies with a strong sustainability angle.

Close

Daniela Nienstedt

Frankfurt

Jürgen Vanselow

Frankfurt

Nadine Mensdorf

Frankfurt

These days, optimism is a rare commodity in the private equity (PE) industry. Market volatility is causing turmoil in the industry and demands new approaches. The current global crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in sobering forecasts for the PE industry for the next 12 months. Solid information is needed to handle the anticipated challenges more effectively. To that end, Russell Reynolds Associates conducted a survey of our trusted PE sources in the DACH region to understand their outlook for the industry.

Outlook 01: The near future

One PE professional’s summary says it all: “There is a tough deal environment, lots of dry powder, but also lots of uncertainty about the global economic development, particularly right now with COVID-19 spreading.” Uncertainty seems to weigh most heavily on the PE industry’s development prospects. This is confirmed by other PE experts who anticipate “a period of uncertainty until economic implications from COVID-19 are fully understood... as a result, less deal activity and more failed processes are likely in the short term.” In addition, there is a presumption that the difficult macroeconomic environment sets high barriers to investment and to an increase in capital inflows.

Not surprisingly, most of the survey participants expect an economic downturn within the next six months, which will have a significant impact on the PE industry.

The experts assume that the “industrial cycle slow-down will impact top-line growth across industries and assets may need to be held longer to materialize their investment plans. This will likely result in an environment where there will be fewer deals, and the market will be more buyer-friendly than it has been over the past few years.” So, some funds will have difficulty exiting portfolio companies with mediocre performance and certain industries will see hardly any deal flow. Even though certain healthcare sub-sectors might profit, generally, there will be higher hurdles for investment and more demand for less cyclical businesses.

Outlook 02: Attractive (and less attractive) targets

Attractive targets

Sustainable competitive advantage
100%
Strong market position
90%
Favourable industry trends
90%
Strong management team
80%
Stable, recurring cash flows
80%

Unattractive targets

High valuation
90%
Inconsistent cash flow
80%
Political instability
70%
Weak management team
60%
High debt levels
30%

In this context, we should take a closer look at characteristics that make target companies attractive. All respondents agreed that sustainable competitive advantages are the most important characteristic of a target company. Ninety percent of respondents indicated that a strong market position and favourable industry trends are very positive, and eighty percent of respondents favoured a strong management team, as well as stable, recurring cash flows.

On the other hand, ninety percent of survey respondents considered a high valuation unattractive, and eighty percent of respondents considered inconsistent cash flow to be unattractive. Political instability and a weak management team were considered unattractive by seventy percent and sixty percent of respondents, respectively. Only thirty percent of respondents consider high debt levels a less attractive characteristic for a target.

Outlook 3: Expanding strategies

We have observed various and evolving expansion strategies in recent years. In terms of market bracket, large funds have expanded into the mid- and small cap segment to better target the German Mittelstand. Other vehicles of interest are infrastructure and real estate, as well as minority funds or funds that offer flexible financing structures from debt to equity.

Thematically, ESG is an ever-growing area of interest, with the emergence of funds focused entirely on companies with a sustainability angle. Also, healthcare and software continue to be sectors of significant interest.

Only twenty percent of survey respondents answered “Yes” to the binary question “Is your firm thinking about raising a long-hold fund (i.e., 15+ years of duration)?” The primary challenges associated with long-hold funds include creating “ incentives for management and investment teams, as conventional carry models do not work” and lack of a “strong team with a long-term vision.”

Outlook 4: Geographic developments

GPs as well as LPs have a growing interest in having local offices. Although the DACH region has often been served from outside the region, more and more funds have established or are thinking about establishing local offices in the region to improve their market access.

Outlook 5: Competitiveness

Survey respondents rate the following qualities as essential to remaining competitive: A differentiated strategy, a strong sourcing network, speed in decision making and execution, and an early build-up of angles for a deal. Respondents deemed the following qualities to be very important: Specialization in one sector and ability to attract top-performing investment professionals. In fact, most respondents considered talent management the key to outperforming the market. Additional factors, such as mental flexibility and performing under pressure, enable a strong team to achieve success.

The qualities required to remain competitive will continue to gain importance since market conditions in the next 12 months will not be easy. Obviously, future market conditions are more difficult to predict due to COVID-19. Likely, firms with a flexible structure that allows short-term liquidity injections will have a competitive advantage.

Outlook 6: Exits

For exits that do occur in the next 12 months, secondary buyouts and trade sales would likely be the most favourable types of exit for portfolio companies. Initial public offerings are less likely due to extreme and possibly sustained market volatility.

Outlook 7: Recruitment

An evaluation of responses on predicted portfolio company recruitment over the next 12 months reveals several functional areas where we will likely see new talent. Seventy percent of survey respondents expect to hire in general management and in finance. Forty percent of respondents plan to hire group CEOs and positions in the technology function. Thirty percent of respondents plan to hire marketing and sales professionals. Only ten percent of respondents plan to hire legal professionals. Finally, the need for professionals with restructuring experience has increased in light of the current crisis.

The experts surveyed were managing partners (18%), managing directors (36%), and investment principals (45%). Their geographic focus is primarily on the DACH region (63%), followed by Western Europe (27%) and Germany only (18%). Only 9% have a broader focus covering all of Europe.

In response to the question “What is the size of your most recent flagship fund?” 27% answered less than €1 billion, 18% answered €1 billion to €2.49 billion, 18% answered €2.5 billion to €4.99 billion, and 18% answered over €5 billion.

Technology and InnovationIndustry TrendsCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital Officers

Online Grocery Spiked During COVID-19. What Now?

FinanceSuccessionPrivate CapitalPrivate EquityFinance OfficersC-Suite Succession

CFO Succession in France: Why the Safest Choice Isn't Always the Right One

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices