Differentiating Sustainable Business Leaders from Other Top-Tier Executive

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

reports-surveys

Making Sustainability Count: How to embed sustainability in leaders’ objectives

Making Sustainability Count: How to Embed Sustainability in Leaders’ Objectives

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability OfficersExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Article

February 02, 2021

11 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadershipSustainability OfficersExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Executive Summary

To make sustainability efforts stick, business leaders need to tie sustainable performance to manager compensation to meet company-wide goals.

Close

Russell Reynolds Associates recently partnered with the United Nations Global Compact to study the characteristics and behaviors that differentiate sustainable business leaders from other top-tier executives, the findings of which were summarized in Leadership for the Decade of Action. The article below builds upon this research to focus on the question of how to embed sustainability goals into the objectives of senior leaders. Please refer to the original study for full details on methodology and findings.

Corporate commitment to sustainability is at an all-time high. Walmart has pledged to eliminate its greenhouse gas emissions by 2040.1 BP has begun its long-awaited pivot to renewable energy, predicting that the world has already surpassed “peak oil” demand.2 Microsoft aims to achieve zero waste in its direct operations, products and packaging by 2030.3 The leaders of these companies are not alone in their belief that the path forward must be decidedly more sustainable: according to research by Accenture and the United Nations Global Compact, nine in ten CEOs believe integration of sustainability will be important to the future success of their business.

Yet, despite these public commitments, significant hurdles remain in the pursuit of sustainable business. To effectively drive the transformation needed to integrate sustainability into business strategy and operations, companies must embed it in the leadership culture of their organizations – specifically, how they select, assess, reward and develop their senior leaders.

One of the key differences between companies who have authentically embedded sustainability into their strategy and those who are still only managing sustainability as an adjunct to strategy (or even worse, companies known for “green-washing”) is that sustainability manifests itself in the objectives and incentives of their most senior leaders.

Companies at the forefront of this change have driven sustainability into the core of their strategy and linked it to their organizational mission and purpose. While there is no single best method by which to create the necessary focus on – and accountability for – sustainability, companies should address three aspects of objective-setting to ensure that sustainability ambitions are effectively cascaded through the organization:

How priorities are set

How work gets done

How leaders are rewarded

How priorities are set

In our research studying more than 50 transformative sustainable business leaders, one of the lessons we heard most often was that, in order to be successful, enterprise-wide sustainability objectives must be clearly linked to the company’s core strategy. Sustainability must not be conceived as something that sits outside of or adjacent to the strategy, but rather a vital enabler of the strategy itself. To determine the materiality of a given sustainability objective, each should be evaluated according to both its importance to stakeholders and the potential business impact.

Some organizations choose to describe these objectives in terms of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), while others contextualize them in terms of their primary stakeholder groups, most often employees, customers, shareholders, suppliers or even society at large. Regardless of the framework used to articulate the objectives, the process by which they are established should be inclusive of a wide variety of stakeholder perspectives to ensure that the prioritized objectives are truly material to the business, and that the company is considering all possible sustainability risks and growth opportunities. The most successful companies are increasingly choosing to focus on a few key areas rather than trying to set objectives for all issues or SDGs that a company may impact. This enables better strategic allocation of resources and, ultimately, greater impact.

In all instances, enterprise-wide objectives should be time bound, with a combination of longer-term goals and the key milestones that articulate the short- and medium-term steps required to achieve that goal. Companies may or may not choose to disclose interim goals externally, but public commitment to the overall objectives is critical for ensuring transparency and accountability.

Once the enterprise-wide objectives and timescales have been established, progress against those objectives should be regularly reviewed at the executive committee and board level, with objective input from external entities such as rating agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Critically, the CEO and other leaders must regularly speak to these objectives and the progress against them when they engage with the broader organization, making sure to communicate the business benefit of achieving objectives. This provides a single, clear framework to which others leaders can connect, and reinforces the importance of these objectives.

When Campbell’s Soup Company set out to develop their sustainability strategy, they solicited stakeholder input to understand what they saw as the most important parts of the journey from “farm to fork,” then mapped those themes to the SDGs in order to identify the areas where they could make the biggest impact while also best addressing stakeholder priorities.

As part of Philips’ commitment to take back and repurpose its customers’ large medical systems equipment, the company added a dedicated circular economy indicator to its executive committee dashboard. According to CEO Frans van Houten, the public and prominent nature of this dashboard helped to convince internal skeptics that the company’s commitment was real – once senior leaders realized that “appearing in the red” meant you could expect a call from the CEO, the rate of adoption quickly increased.

How work gets done

To yield both financial and social impact, enterprise-wide sustainability objectives must then be translated into individual-level objectives that dictate how work gets done. In many organizations, the chief sustainability officer or equivalent works with their C-suite counterparts to first identify the parts of the business that will play a role in implementing the objectives, and then re-engineer business processes to achieve them.

It is at this stage that individual business units and their leaders begin to see how their day-to-day work contributes to (or undermines) the company’s overall sustainability objectives. The identification of specific sustainability key performance indicators (KPIs) helps to create focus for leaders and mitigates the risk of company-level objectives feeling too big picture or long-term. Ensuring that individual leaders can “touch and feel” them in their work and daily decision-making is critical.

Selecting the appropriate metric and scope of measurement is another essential component for translating company-level ambition to individual-level action. Companies must take care to distinguish between output (for example, the number of smallholder farmers who have received capacity-building technical assistance) and outcome (the percentage increase in those farmers’ annual incomes or yield of sustainably grown agricultural products). Confusing these two metrics can inadvertently incentivize focus on the wrong type of change, resulting in decisions made to inflate output numbers as opposed to real outcomes.

3M holds its individual business units accountable for innovating on better products for the consumer and the environment by introducing sustainability KPIs into the new product development and launch process. Beginning in 2019, 100 percent of the company’s new products (approximately 1,000 per year) are required to have a Sustainability Value Commitment that demonstrates how the product drives impact for the greater good. The company measures the impact of this commitment and publicly reports on it annually to ensure transparency.

How leaders are rewarded

To complete the accountability cycle and ensure that the entire organization is incentivized to contribute to achieving the overall sustainability objectives, sustainability KPIs must flow through to performance measurement frameworks and the process by which leaders are evaluated and rewarded. For some companies this means tying a proportion of compensation to individual or business unit KPIs, while for others it is encapsulated in the measurement of “how” a leader achieved what they did.

The particulars of each company’s overall and individual-level sustainability objectives will determine the incentive scheme that will be most effective. Factors to consider include the urgency of the change required, the timescale of the objectives, and the level of control that the individual leader has on ultimate outcomes. For instance, sustainability objectives set in response to market demand for urgent change may necessitate linkage to annual or even quarterly variable compensation, whereas objectives that require substantive R&D or re-engineering of business processes may be better served by three-, five- or even seven-year horizons that are tied to long-term stock ownership.

It is critical that individual leaders understand that their success, and the rewards they reap, are influenced by their contributions to sustainability goals. It is this final component that provides the carrot (and, in some instances, stick) that ensures that leaders focus on the right activities and model the right set of behaviors.

As part of its sweeping sustainability program, Sharing Beauty with All, L’Oreal now links all brand and country managers’ bonuses to sustainability targets, including the contribution the brand is making to the company’s environmental or social purpose, and how well the company’s growth has been shared with employees and local communities.

Specialty materials manufacturer DSM established an ESG-linked compensation policy for its managing board in 2010 and expanded it beyond the C-suite in 2013, tying ESG goals to the bonuses of operational and front-line managers. Since introducing the new policy DSM has consistently met and often exceeded its targets, prompting the company to increase the scope and breadth of the policy; as of 2019, 50 percent of short- and long-term compensation are tied to explicit targets related to energy reduction and employee engagement.

Ambitious and vital goals

In order for companies to achieve the ambitious – yet vital – goals they have set for themselves in pursuit of a more equitable and sustainable economic system, big commitments must be translated into small actions. It is only by cascading the enterprise-level ambition to individual-level objectives and tying progress against those objectives to performance measurement frameworks that companies will begin to make a significant impact for the stakeholders they seek to serve. The best organizations are taking concerted steps to embed sustainability into the frameworks and processes that drive how leaders are selected, promoted, rewarded and developed. This provides a powerful signal from the top that the leadership team will back its commitment to sustainability with more than just words, and instead take the necessary steps to achieve real impact – for both the company itself and society at large.

Additional Authors

Tom Handcock is the global head of Knowledge Management at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in London.

Emily Meneer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Sustainability practice knowledge team. She is based in Portland.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices