Opening Eyes and Efforts to Diverse Recruiting in Financial Services | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Opening Eyes and Efforts to Diverse Recruiting in Financial Services

LeadershipFinancial ServicesInclusion and CultureCulture Analytics

Article

December 11, 2020

4 min

LeadershipFinancial ServicesInclusion and CultureCulture Analytics

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Women of Color, Men of Color and White Women all see their representation decrease as each move higher up the corporate ladder.

Close

Art Hopkins

Atlanta

Fawad Bajwa

Toronto
New York

Robert Voth

Chicago

The racial awakenings of 2020 have opened the eyes of banking executives and their boards to a reality that diverse employees have known and experienced for decades: the road to the C-suite for women and underrepresented minorities throughout financial services presents more challenges and hurdles than faced by their white and male counterparts.

A recent search for a chief risk officer at a Fortune 100 diversified financial services company is a prime example.

Extensive research identified hundreds of potential executives within risk, compliance, and ancillary roles who potentially met the minimal technical competences and experiences defined as necessary by US regulatory bodies, human resources, and the risk committee of the board.

Of this target environment, more than 25 percent identified as female or non-white male. When all research was assessed and layered over the minimum career skills, technical qualifications, and experiences required by the client and regulators, the number dropped to 10 percent.

The solution is not to lower qualifications. Even if the regulators relaxed their qualifications to consider executives from companies one-eighth the size, or for a line of business credit risk executive to be promoted three steps at once, the chances of failure for that executive, the financial institution, and their customers, would be substantial.

This is not atypical. Data from the 2018 Women in the Workplace study shows the rapid drop-off of non-white males at every point of career progression in American companies. White men represent just 36 percent of entry-level employees, but 68 percent of C-level executives.

Men of color (who drop from 16 percent to 10 percent) and white women (31 percent to 19 percent) lose out as their careers move forward – but neither so badly as women of color, who represent 17 percent of entry-level employees, but only 3 percent of C-level leaders.

Talent pipeline by gender and race, 2018 USA

Gender
and Race

Talent Pipeline

Entry-Level

Manager

Director

Vice-President

Senior Vice-President

C-Level

Women of Color

17%

12%

10%

5%

4%

3%

White Women

31%

27%

26%

24%

19%

18%

Men of Color

16%

16%

13%

12%

10%

10%

White Men

36%

46%

52%

59%

67%

68%

Source: LeanIn.org and McKinsey. Women in the Workplace 2018. Based off an examination of employee data of 279 US corporations

Virtually every major employer throughout banking has targeted minority candidates in the recruiting process, hired diversity, equity & inclusion professionals to try and improve inclusion and belonging in the workplace, and had senior executives make public commitments to the value of a diverse workforce.

Despite these efforts, the challenges facing women and professionals of color on the way to the C-suite continues to be significant enough to get them to switch banks or drop out of the workforce all together.

Companies throughout financial services have solutions to diversity and inclusion in their hands, yet fail to successfully train, retain, and accelerate the development and retention of diverse executives who sit in their very ranks.

Improvements are not happening fast enough. This despite workplace diversity being one of the most important predictors of sales revenue, profitability, employee engagement, innovation and other key metrics, findings empirically verified throughout the years by researchers in academia and industry.

The casual recognition and token programs banks have taken these past decades need to be replaced by unvarnished conversations that result in a clear acknowledgment of the problems organizations are facing. You may think your company is doing enough, but studies show you are not, and what you are doing is not working well enough to really move the needle.

Rather than play the zero-sum game of stealing diverse talent from one another, financial services companies need to focus their energy and efforts on improving diversity and inclusion in their high middle management ranks. There is no excuse for failure.

What can leaders do to improve existing efforts?

Don't ignore great opportunities

Leadership teams often can hire a great diverse employee but pass because they don’t have an immediate role to fill. This limited thinking and lack of creativeness stunts the building of inclusive cultures and strong diverse benches. Strong candidates will add value to your organization starting on day one. Additionally, these star diverse candidates – today one level below your convenient need– will be out of reach when you decide you are ready.

Create a diversity accelerator program

Too many organizations provide the same opportunities to every employee regardless of their needs and capabilities. A diversity accelerator program is a plan of action that focuses rapid training, education, and mentorship for high-potential diverse executives. These are easily designed, implemented, and executed with clear metrics around success, and they have been shown to deliver exceptional returns for all involved.

Dedicate senior management to mentorship programs

Companies often hire talent as the next generation of leaders, then fail to treat them like it. The unique path women and diverse males take to the C-suite are best shared by those who have blazed those paths before them; their battle scars, lessons learned, and pride of success are felt and believed on an intrinsically different level. These interactions also provide an opportunity to assess these up-and-coming employees and garner a clear understanding of their strengths and capabilities.

Revamp your recruiting programs

Passively waiting for diverse candidates to apply for jobs isn’t enough – companies must actively seek out diverse talent where they are. Companies need to develop and implement diversity-specific recruiting programs designed to identify and attract high-potential executives before they reach the C-suite at your competitors. Aggressively recruit them to ensure inclusiveness throughout the company.

The exceptional challenges of 2020 have seen people come together and take action to redefine the workplace. The time is now for those solutions to include diversity and inclusion throughout all executive levels so articles like this one –and the year 2020 – are left forever to the history books.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices