Adapting Board Composition for a Changing World | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Adapting Board Composition for a Changing World

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

June 01, 2020

6 min

Next Generation BoardsBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The increased demands of boards during the pandemic showed some cracks in current structures as some members found themselves overburdened.

Close

Jack (Rusty) O’Kelley

Miami

The COVID-19 crisis has increased the demand for board insight, oversight, and advice, while boards attempt to adapt to new ways of working, new tools, and new structures. Many have stepped up as a powerful sounding board for stressed CEOs. Other boards struggle, not contributing as needed or causing unnecessary distractions.

Despite the fact that most boards have done well, over the last quarter we have seen:

Directors whose skills and experiences no longer match the circumstances of the company as strategies are rethought and companies pivot to new products, services, and operating models

Overburdened directors who could not be counted on to show up for multiple crisis meetings

Sitting CEO and CFO directors who must necessarily pay attention to their own business first

Directors with too much time on their hands who overstepped into operations, wasting management’s limited time and resources

Technology-averse directors who could not manage to join a Zoom meeting

Older directors who are no longer sure they want to go through a crisis like this again

Boards who simply do not have enough directors to staff ad hoc crisis-related committees

Boards and management teams are starting to consider how to reshape the board to cope with the current crisis, a potential second wave, and whatever the new normal looks in the years ahead. Will the board need to add restructuring/turnaround experience, more current or retired CEOs with general management experience, digital expertise or diversify itself to avoid dependence on directors in the most at-risk demographic groups (i.e., over 70)? Is there a director succession plan in place, particularly for key board leaders? Institutional investors who are looking at the board’s performance during the crisis and in the coming years will continue to push boards to improve composition and effectiveness, with an increasing focus on racial and ethnic diversity.

The crisis has also illuminated the leadership abilities of the management team and their diversity (or lack thereof) and raised important questions about the executive succession plan. The same is true for board succession. Future director searches will require a candid analysis of the board’s current composition against changing company strategy, identifying future needs as they become clearer and developing a more thoughtful approach to board recruitment.

Under the current circumstances, boards must ask the tough questions:

What skills are absent and which key demographics are underrepresented?

Are there any directors whose skillset is no longer relevant and/or whose board seat would be better utilized by a different director profile?

Are there any directors who do not actively or constructively contribute?

Which directors are “key person” risks?

To answer those tough questions, enhance risk management, and support governance best practices, boards can start with a board composition analysis, a strategic planning process that consists of four primary activities led by the Nominating and Governance Committee (NomCo):

Understand the emerging strategy

The first step is for the NomCo to leverage its understanding of the company’s emerging strategy and related organizational changes, as they will play out over the next few years. This will provide the context for the board composition analysis. If that path is not yet clear enough, the committee can focus on company purpose.

Agree on the skills and experiences required

If the committee has a sense of the direction of travel for the company, it will be easier to decide who ought to be on the bus (to invert Jim Collins’ famous edict1). Thus the second phase focuses on developing a clear and agreed-upon set of definitions for the key skills and experiences (including diversity) that will be needed at the board level and for the committee to take a hardheaded look at each director’s skills and experiences against those definitions.

Create consensus on future plans

The third phase is to work with each director and review the matrix with them. It is important that everyone feels the process has been fair and transparent. The committee also needs to explicitly ask each director about their personal plans vis-à-vis the board (all other factors being equal). An accurate forecast of when vacancies may occur is essential, though the committee may also need to make tough decisions to create vacancies in order to refresh the board.

Consider what to disclose

Investors are seeking more information in an easily digestible format to enable them to understand how board composition links to the company’s strategy. Having completed the prior steps, board leaders and the legal team can determine what can be disclosed to investors about the process, current board composition and decisions about future recruiting.

The wrong way to do the right thing

As beneficial as board succession planning can be, there are numerous ways that it can be done badly to the ultimate detriment of the board, the company and its shareholders. We have seen four common errors that derail the work:

Putting strategy and purpose second

We often see boards undertake these efforts without explicitly connecting them to the overall strategy or purpose of the company.

Ignoring the competition

Boards often fail to benchmark themselves against their peer group, yet when analyzing corporate governance practices, investors often look at entire sectors at a time.

Assuming it is all about "joiners", not "leavers"

Movement of directors is a natural occurrence—whether due to age or tenure limits, overburdening, or individual director desires and life changes. We have seen too many occasions when these changes were known ahead of time by directors but not shared with the NomCo.

Forgetting about board and committee leadership and member rotation

While few boards have policies to limit the tenure of the board leader (non-executive chair or lead independent director) and other key roles or committee memberships, it is important to understand the impact of retirements and new joiners on the composition of committees. The leadership of committees and the board itself should be part of the plan.

Once the board begins the process of undertaking a composition analysis, it is important that it is an open, inclusive process involving every single director. This can’t simply be managed by the general counsel or another executive from afar. Everyone has to have buy-in to the process and analysis.

However, boards can’t avoid hard conversations during this process. Some of today’s directors won’t have an obvious role on tomorrow’s board, and others may believe they have qualifications or relevance that they don’t truly hold. The board leader or NomCo chair needs to be willing to have an open, honest, and direct conversation with each board member during this process, including a willingness to help some directors find their way off the board.

While the board has to own the process and the results, using a third-party advisor can help deal with some of the challenges involved. One benefit is that an external advisor can help ensure there is the required objectivity and rigor in the process.

The benefits of action:  A rigorous board composition analysis creates value in numerous ways:

It enables the board to set itself up for longer-term success

A well-run board succession effort prevents a transactional approach to director recruitment. Similarly, it enables thoughtful board rotation, including for committee chairs and the board leader, and therefore could be used to improve diversity efforts in board leadership roles.

It gives the board or NomCo chair a neutral data-based tool for addressing individual contributions to the board

It’s difficult for any chair to sit down and address issues of personal contribution with a fellow director, but a board composition analysis creates tools and opportunity to have a more neutral, fact-based discussion about skills and qualifications. Likewise, it can provide a foundation for talking about director retirement, leadership changes, and committee rotation—all things a healthy, well-performing board ought to address.

A rigorous board composition analysis is further evidence that a board is taking its responsibilities seriously, is thinking about the future direction of the company, and is prepared to help steward the organization over the long term. The board, if it so chooses, can disclose the analysis to outside investors.

It can be communicated to outside stakeholders

Thoughtful succession planning is critical to an effective and high-performing board. Although it must be championed by the independent board leadership, an outside advisor can help or even lead the effort. But it is ultimately up to the entire board to thoughtfully engage in the process and be open to the conversations that follow.

Additional Authors

PJ Neal leads the Center for Leadership Insight at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in Boston.

The executives who ignited the transformations from good to great did not first figure out where to drive the bus and then get people to take it there. No, they first got the right people on the bus (and the wrong people off the bus) and then figured out where to drive it. Jim Collins. Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap... and Others Don't. New York: HarperCollins, 2001.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices