Succeeding in HR: Advice From Recently Appointed CHROs | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Succeeding in HR: Advice From Recently Appointed CHROs

Inclusive LeadershipCareer TransitionsHuman Resources OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

Article

January 08, 2021

5 min

Inclusive LeadershipCareer TransitionsHuman Resources OfficersExecutive SearchC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

RRA recently hosted two virtual panel events with more than 200 HR leaders to discuss the factors that contribute to HR leaders successfully transitioning into new roles.

Close

Russell Reynolds Associates recently hosted two virtual panel events with more than 200 HR leaders to discuss the factors that contribute to HR leaders successfully transitioning into new roles. Below are key insights from our nine CHRO panelists who have been in their new roles for 12-18 months, along with their advice for HR leaders considering their next move.

Before (or at) the starting line

Understand the business: Several CHROs talked about the need to learn about a new industry, ownership structure or work culture, and reading annual reports, engagement surveys, and any available presentations or data. Even internally appointed CHROs mentioned the need to broaden their understanding of various business units or regions.

Understand the context: Read as much research as possible and have early conversations with the board, CEO, C-suite, and your predecessor/incumbent. Understand where they are coming from and don’t be afraid to ask questions, as their answers will help you chart a strategy that reflects collective goals. One CHRO highlighted the importance of asking questions to the chief administrative officer, who oversaw HR before she joined. Another talked about the need to do some homework on the board and management’s role in governance, so they could work effectively with leadership once in the role.

Leverage your network: Speak to industry experts, or HR leaders who have been in similar roles. Have a network you can trust and tap on, and mentors who can advise you.

The first 90 days

A. Relationships

Engage the board: Several CHROs talked about the need to understand board dynamics, priorities, areas of accountability, and their vision for the CHRO mandate. It was noted that having early discussions with the board chair on how they saw the CEO-CHRO relationship was very helpful.

Get the CEO relationship right: ”Choose your boss” was frequently said. Many of our panel also mentioned the need to balance board engagement carefully with the CEO-CHRO partnership, and to build a high-trust relationship with the CEO. One CHRO stated that not being co-located with the CEO added an additional layer of complication which further highlighted the need for trust and collaboration.

Establish relationships with peers: One CHRO shared that peer dynamics are as critical as CEO or board dynamics. Suggestions to build peer relationships included conducting site visits to understand pain points and having offsites for the executive leadership team. This helped new CHROs gain trust to garner some quick wins, but also honor the past in cases where the organization was not ready for change.

Continue to leverage your network: Panelists recommended finding HR leaders in your network who are wise about managing the board, or identifying someone who knows members of your board, understands your business, or your unique company situation (e.g. CEO transition, PE-backed ownership, turnaround, etc.).

B. Impact

Be intentional about structuring your role: One CHRO mapped out what her role should look like, and then identified areas where she did and did not have experience. Another talked about the importance of self-awareness and knowing where you have skill gaps. Another took a different approach and aligned with leaders on what success looked like a year out and worked backwards from there. In terms of the more technical aspects of HR, several CHROs brought up the need for a better understanding of executive compensation. Overall, the panel stressed the need to move beyond the Job Description and instead focus on what to achieve at transition milestones.

Identify what needs to change vs. stay the same: One CHRO suggested keeping a running list of things that do not make sense in early conversations, so you can revisit it and see what needs to be changed when you feel ready to do so.

Learn more and do less: Several CHROs talked about the need to listen and learn, and not make big decisions in the first 90 days. They stressed that leaders should not cave into pressure to make decisions early. Instead, they should identify pain points for some quick wins and hold their ground when pushed to make sweeping changes in the early days.

C. Reputation

Decide what you want to be known for: Figure out your personal brand and establish some ground rules for your transition both in communication and action. If you don’t set the narrative, then someone else will. One CHRO talked about the need to be authentic as she was hired because she was different.

Be prepared for a crisis and harness it: One healthcare CHRO talked about her 100-day plan but noted that COVID-19 hit within eight weeks of joining. Another created cross-functional taskforces to solve enterprise-level problems and rollout solutions faster. Another CHRO talked about the Black Lives Matter movement in the US and how their company had to respond quickly but thoughtfully.

D. Resilience

Focus on work-life integration: One CHRO stressed the importance of high-quality sleep, diet, and exercise. Another UK-based CHRO took her family to visit her company’s HQ in the US, in her third month on the job, so her family could spend time with the CEO in order to understand where and how she spent her time.

Pace yourself: Several CHROs highlighted the need to have scalable work practices so you can achieve efficiency and balance and stay in the moment when working day-to-day. Others talked about prioritizing, and not trying to solve everything with the same pace and rigor.

The next 6-12 months

Assess your team: Several CHROs talked about honoring the teams they inherited. One CHRO decided to make no new hires for the first 6-8 months, while another noted that his first job was to maximize the value of his existing team. The panelists agreed that investing in and advancing their team was important, and swapping people out was the last resort. They were thoughtful about identifying genuine talent needs that filled gaps in their teams’ or their own experience.

Internalize lessons learned: One CHRO shared that his team institutionalized several lessons from the pandemic. His HR organization had become better at connecting people using technology, asking people how they feel, and ensuring that new employees had “water cooler moments” even when boarding or working remotely.

The playbook for HR leaders considering their next move

Do your homework:

Learn about the company, its unique situation, the role, and the CEO and board. Consider whether this is something you see yourself thriving in. For instance, one HR leader might enjoy a “steady state” role while another may thrive in a transformational role. Know your strengths and your career goals.

Learn through others:

Have specialists and trusted advisors around you. Learn through others who have thrived in similar situations to get smart in a short time.

Choose your boss:

Be comfortable with who you are going to work for. Your CEO or direct manager and you should have similar ambitions for the company, work styles that complement each other, and the ability to connect on a human level. If you see a mismatch in values or are concerned about how they will position your role, reconsider the move.

Build a breadth of experience:

Expect to use every tool in your toolbox and know that no experience goes to waste.

Expect a learning curve:

You are signing up to move away from something you are highly successful at, to something that will put you to the test again. Assess your appetite and motivation to go through this process.

Click here to read about advice for new CHROs from recently appointed CHROs who have transitioned into their new roles.

Succeeding in HR: Advice From Recently Appointed CHROs

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices