The Rise of the Chief Product Officer: Attracting and Retaining Product Talent | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Rise of the Chief Product Officer: Attracting and Retaining Product Talent

Technology and InnovationCustomer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationInnovation, Research, and DevelopmentTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

Article

Sean Roberts

June 25, 2020

7 min

Technology and InnovationCustomer Activation and GrowthTransformation and InnovationInnovation, Research, and DevelopmentTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

When we asked product leaders what attracted them to a new organization, their answers revolved around the impact they could make.

Close

Sean Roberts

London

Adapting to constant innovation and transformation has become the only way to compete in a rapidly disrupting market landscape

Every company must think and act like a technology company to remain relevant in the current competitive landscape.

We are in the age of the empowered customer. In both B2C and B2B alike, the customer is more empowered than ever before, with more data (both performance and social) to support their decision making, and lower barriers to switching loyalties. For leaders, this has created an imperative to structure and build organizations which can listen to customers and respond at speed. The cost of inaction is irrelevance.

Technology has become central to remaining competitive, both to enable the iterative cycles required to constantly optimize products, but also as a stimulus for demand. In both our client interactions and in conversations with top product leaders, we’ve seen a rising need for chief product officers (CPOs) who are tech savvy, commercial and customer-focused.

The most advanced companies are developing platform offerings, becoming convenors of eco-systems and gaining invaluable insights in doing so. The product function has been at the eye of this storm, accelerating new approaches to the market and lubricating customer-focused conversations across diverse functions, from marketing and technology to the lines of business. As a result, product has been given an increasingly loud voice with a seat at the top table, and the remit to actively drive change and revenue growth. In building product functions, companies are creating a stabilising connective tissue between technology and the customer, allowing them to create new digital propositions, ways of working and to develop partnerships with technology organizations to broaden their reach.

The most advanced companies are developing platform offerings, becoming convenors of eco-systems and gaining invaluable insights in doing so.

How to hire a CPO

Compensation is not the only way to attract and retain top talent; organizations must sell their vision and culture to enter the competitive product landscape

Talent in technology roles is fiercely fought over, and product talent is no exception.

When we asked product leaders what would most attract them to a new organization, their answers largely revolved around how much impact they could make, and how much autonomy they would have. They wanted to hear what the company mission was and how they would be empowered to make it successful. They also wanted transparency, to hear from current executives about the challenges as well as the opportunities in charting the organization’s future direction. Their sense of mission is strong: many of our interviewees spoke about their unwillingness to leave roles mid project cycle as they had developed a unique sense of ownership for the product. All of their answers spoke to a passion for the end-user – the customer.

Sell me your vision

Product engineers are able to recognize when something is outdated – even before it really is. They will want to do something new and not just clean up a mess. This said, product talent will accept that an organization may not yet have scaled or is just starting on a transformation journey. Whichever the story, an organization should sell its future vision.

What makes you different?

Taking someone out of a project mid-role takes some convincing. Every job offer says the company is data driven, customer and employee centric, has large impact etc. – so for those trying to hire, it is essential to work out what your organization’s differentiator is. Key points include how your culture is aligned to the speed and innovation of a product function and how it supports continuous learning.

What will my personal impact be?

Product and software talent will want to understand how much impact and autonomy they will have in the company. This is where an early-stage organization can shine. The Amazons and Apples are not necessarily always the most attractive, because although they have top-notch reputations, there is a concern about the extent of individual impact possible.

Where does product sit?

Where the product function sits often shows the organization’s commitment to the product strategy. The best place will differ and will be affected by the archetype and the business. However, most commonly, a CPO will want a seat alongside a chief technology officer, where both are equals and can create a healthy tension.

How will you ensure that I succeed?

Make sure you sell a CPO candidate on their own development and explain that they will have a diverse range of opportunities in the role. The most successful organizations allow an annual training budget, time to keep up to date with technological trends, and time to build close contacts in the wider product community.

What is the organization's social purpose?

For example, are you broadening access to services by democratizing a product? Being able to explain the social purpose of the company doesn’t just land well with product talent, but with customers too. Product functions can then partner with marketing on how best to integrate the message for maximum market impact.

What are the challenges?

Being open and honest about limitations is beneficial – address the elephant in the room straight away. For example, if you are trying to disrupt an industry but are a non-tech traditional organization, how will you overcome this? Specifically, talent will want to know:

Investment. Money is commitment, so how is the organization investing in this vision?

Organizational barriers. What are they, structurally and culturally?

Timeline. When do you want this investment and work to be realized? What is the time to completion?

Talent acquisition is one of the biggest challenges; there is a shortage in supply. First, you are usually taking someone out of a project mid-role, which takes some convincing. What is your differentiator? Sell the vision and big-picture of your company. Secondly, there is no cookbook for hiring, but being open and honest about the limitations and opportunities early is beneficial. Thirdly, I would want to know: “How much impact as an individual am I going to have in the company I am joining?
Ron Gura

How conducive is our company culture to innovation and transformation?

Product is one of the rare fields where inclusive in career background is a huge advantage – that is, coming from a non-traditional background, either not marketing or not technology. It’s about making it exciting to those individuals, and helping them understand what you’re going to do for them and having the environment where you can build their capabilities
Brian Harris

Technology-first product talent will need help integrating into a non-technology organization.

Talent coming from tech-first organizations into non-tech companies will quickly learn that there are unfamiliar sets of stakeholders pulling the levers of the business. Even when talent comes from a similar organization, the product function itself can vary quite a bit, with a large diversity of skill sets and backgrounds.

The most successful integrations occur when the hiring organization consciously considers how to give new product talent a mix of vertical expertise and stakeholder exposure, helping them adapt to the business language of those less technologically versed. The introduction of product talent into a non-tech company may also be an opportunity to ask the question: how conducive is our company culture to innovation and transformation? Product talent will want to see evidence that your company is able to innovate or act in a more agile manner throughout the interview process – speedy decision-making and swift feedback will show commitment to change and relative pace.

The product role affects change step-by-step through influence - leveraging trust and good relationships. Acting as an imperial empire-builder from day one will not work.
Johannes Bruder

When deciding which talent pools to pursue, it’s worth thinking about how realistic it is to transition the product talent into the organization. If you are a traditional automotive manufacturer, it may be tricky to integrate and retain talent from Google, for example. As such, it may be better to look in more comparable organization structures for talent.

When a CPO joins a legacy organization, quite often, most other people will not have worked with a product team or a senior product leader. This can be really tough on a CPO. To ease the introduction of a new role, the CEO should make the remit clear within the organization, bedding it in with the rest of the exec team. Most difficulties arise because the role is not quite understood and roles and responsibilities are too blurry.
Tanya Cordrey

Framework for discussion

Current situation

Is the product new to the market?

Is there product buy-in from the top team?

Is product development core to the business strategy?

Is product more aligned to marketing, or technology, or a business unit?

Product capability

How sophisticated is the product function?

What are the processes/structure in place – e.g. waterfall, agile, full-stack tribes and squads?

Is the product team aligned to the business strategy?

Is the product function continuously iterating and innovating?

Is there a talent pipeline for the product function? Is the Product leader engaged in succession planning?

Future priorities

Transform, grow, or innovate?

Are you looking to attract product talent with a new leader?

Are you looking to attract investment?

Are you looking to extend or consolidate your existing product portfolio?

Are you looking to reposition your existing products?

Growth through M&A and inorganic growth, or by farming the existing products?

Which of geographic expansion, diversification, consolidation, and targeting new demographics best describes you aim?

Additional Authors

George Head is a Knowledge Associate for the Technology Officers Practice, based in London. Working broadly across the technology sector, George is focused on identifying emerging trends and codifying the priorities outlined by our clients.

Participants

We would like to thank all of our participants for their insights and time.

Ron Gura, SVP Product, WeWork

Markus Pultweiser, Chief Digital Officer, Deutsche Bank

Kriti Sharma, VP Product, GfK

Martin Eriksson, Co-Founder, Mind the Product; Chief Product Officer in Residence, EQT Ventures

Johannes Bruder, Chief Product Officer, Delivery Hero

Tanya Cordrey, Founder, Granary Square; Partner, AFK Partners

Brian Harris, SVP Product, Nets Group

Ben Fox, Chief Product Officer, AdTech, Verizon Media

Josh Crossick, Chief Product Officer, letgo

David Katz, Chief Product Officer, Afterpay

David Cramer, CEO, Software and Data, CPA Global

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices