CHRO Radar: The View from Japan | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CHRO Radar: The View from Japan

Conversation with Jun Kawai, Leadership Advisor at RRA.

CONNECT WITH OUR EXPERTS

Across the world, business leaders are increasingly concerned with ensuring they have the right expertise to drive their organizations forward. Our most recent Global Leadership Monitor (H2 2024) reveals that 57% of global business leaders see the availability of key talent/skills as one of the top five greatest threats to their business in the next 12 to 18 months. It’s perhaps one reason why CHRO turnover has declined globally over the past year.

Clearly, organizations are relying more than ever on their CHROs—and prizing experienced leaders to navigate an increasingly uncertain operating environment.

But do these global trends reflect what’s happening in Japan right now? How does the situation differ, and why? To get the local context, we sat down with Russell Reynolds Associates’ Jun Kawai.

Jun, how does the Japanese talent market differ from other markets?

I think there are a few things that make the Japanese labor market distinct. First, there’s a long tradition of lifelong employment here and a deeply ingrained respect for seniority. Historically, people have stayed with the same employer for their entire career. There are strict laws and regulations that make it difficult for companies to dismiss employees at will. And job-hopping is seen as a very negative thing. However, these things are starting to change. Companies are becoming less committed to offering a job for life. And the younger generation is more open to switching companies in order to further their career.

Another key difference is Japan’s population. Famously, we have an aging workforce and shrinking birth rate. Around 30% of the population is over 60 This creates an upside-down pyramid structure, where a small number of young people have to support a large number of elderly people. So there’s a shortage of young leadership talent, which not only leads to intense competition but also makes retention a struggle.

Finally, Japan is still lagging behind other developed countries when it comes to gender diversity. We need more women in the workforce, especially at the managerial level. And while the number of women executives is rising, they still tend to be in administrative areas like HR, Legal, and Finance rather than the more strategic, commercial functions within the business unit.

What impact does this have on the local CHRO market?

Our shrinking and aging population means that Japanese businesses have to expand globally to achieve the growth they’re looking for. So they need a CHRO who has that international business experience, rather than someone who’s only worked in or covered Japan.

At the same time, our labor laws mean that Japanese companies have to be smart about finding new ways to make use of their older employees—which could mean re-training them to take on new roles. For example, you may have someone who’s been a mechanical engineer for 30 years, but now you’ve stopped making mechanical products. You can’t let them go, because the law won’t allow it. So you need to train them in coding. We call this reskilling, and it’s a hot topic in HR circles in Japan right now.

Globally, companies seem to be choosing to retain experienced CHROs over first-timers. Is that true in Japan too?

Yes—but perhaps for different reasons than in other markets. RRA’s Global CHRO Turnover Index suggests that companies worldwide are choosing to retain their CHROs because they need a ‘steady hand in turbulent times.’ While that may also be true to some degree here, there’s also another factor at play, which is labor practice. If you want to replace someone who’s already working in your company with a new hire from outside the company, you have to give the existing employee a chance to do the job first.

That means hiring someone is really high cost. So if you already have a CHRO who already knows your company inside out and is doing a reasonable job, there’s less incentive to go through the cost and hassle of replacing them.

What are the big HR challenges for Japanese companies?

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion is a challenge for both Japanese-headquartered companies and multinationals with Japanese operations. Due to the historically low percentage of women in the workforce, there’s a fundamental shortage of experienced female talent in the market, creating a resource gap for DE&I initiatives.

Aside from that, the challenges are different for domestic and foreign companies.

Okay, let’s start with domestic companies. What are the key challenges there?

The first one is corporate governance. Increasingly, publicly listed companies are required to disclose their policies and data on human capital to their shareholders. They also need to craft compelling narratives to attract investors, presenting new challenges for CHROs.

Another issue for domestic companies is that there’s often a disconnect between the HR function and the business leaders. So building a closer working relationship and ensuring that your HR strategy aligns with your business strategy is another priority.

As we’ve already mentioned, reskilling is another key issue. Since Japanese labor laws make it difficult to dismiss employees, they have to find new ways to make use of their existing talent, even in areas where they might lack the relevant experience.

Finally, compensation is another challenge. Foreign multinationals typically pay better than homegrown ones, making recruiting and retaining more difficult for domestic companies.

And how about foreign companies in Japan?

Typically, foreign multinationals have a Head of HR rather than a dedicated CHRO, whose job is to make sure the local company is following the HR policies that have been set by HQ in their home country. But because of our labor laws, foreign companies can’t use the same dynamic hiring and firing practices as they do back elsewhere.

So it’s up to the local HR managers to take those pre-set policies that from overseas and figure out how to apply them here in line with local regulations and cultural norms. But because they aren’t actually involved in setting the strategy, Japanese HR managers often find it hard to develop those strategic business-partnering skills that companies are looking for in a CHRO today.

I would like thank Keiko Shimada for her contributions to this article.

Authors

Jun Kawai is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Industrial and Natural Resources Sector.

Contributing Author

Keiko Shimada  is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board & CEO Advisory Group.

Sources

1 RRA Global Leadership Monitor – H2 2024
2 RRA Global CHRO Turnover Index

CHRO Radar: The View from Asia Pacific

Explore more

Speak to a consultant

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices