Pressure to Evolve: What Sustainability Requires of the Consumer Industry | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Pressure To Evolve: What Sustainability Requires Of The Consumer Industry

Inclusive LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceConsumerBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchInclusion and Culture

Article

May 21, 2021

3 min

Inclusive LeadershipEnvironmental Social and GovernanceConsumerBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive SearchInclusion and Culture

Executive Summary

The picture of a successful company is shifting towards one with sustainable practices ingrained throughout the organization.

Close

Sustainability is solidifying its position as a dominant and permanent feature across the business landscape. A reinvigorated focus on sustainability is forcing business leaders to redefine what commercial success looks like. As a result, companies across industries are facing pressure to engage meaningfully with sustainability from all sides, including setting new ESG standards for suppliers, providing investors better quality reporting on sustainability metrics, and retaining customers who are willing to pay more for sustainable brands1.

Consumer companies face acute challenges in the areas of ESG. There is a lack of commitment from leadership and strategic prioritization of these areas. Supply chains are complex, the demand for corporate transparency is expected, and there are limited resources to build a path to leadership on sustainability. Russell Reynolds Associates’ analysis of 53 companies finds that while many have appointed a chief sustainability officer or the equivalent, few of these executives have adequate seniority, deep subject matter expertise, or resources to build an enterprise wide sustainability function.

Not surprisingly, there is a growing cottage industry of service providers that assist companies in complying with these demands. Strategy consulting firms are acquiring companies to help their clients create smarter sustainability plans, new agencies measure sustainability factors for organizations, and accounting firms have established audit practices to verify organizations’ sustainability metrics.

These new businesses and systems are acting as checks and balances.

Inside, we discuss the model for a high performing sustainability function, define a framework for identifying sustainable leaders, and present four typical archetypes of the sustainability officer.

Terminology

ESG refers to a broad range of environmental, social, and governance criteria on which companies are measured. It is of increasing interest to investors and includes metrics that are frequently weighed in investment decisions.

Sustainability is a more holistic term, often a catch-all for corporate efforts to “do better.” It is essentially a business approach to creating long-term value by considering changing societal values, concerns about climate change and finite natural resources, and economic and political instability.

The picture of a successful company is shifting. While the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) currently provide a robust framework for addressing many of these inequities, advancement has been slow without the necessary leadership or accountability in place. As transparency and accountability become more of the norm, sustainable business leadership, sustainable practices and processes, and ESG leadership are now demanded by stakeholders across industries.

The UN’s Sustainable Development Goals are “the blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all. They address the global challenges we face, including poverty, inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, peace and justice.”2

Source: Sustainable Development Goals, United Nations

Consumer-facing companies must act quickly on sustainability strategies, given their close relationships with customers, the influence of their other stakeholders, and their relationships with suppliers. In this increasingly transparent world, customers want explicit reassurance that what they are buying is good for the planet and that the businesses they patronize are operating at the highest possible standards.3 These digitally empowered users are candidly discussing both their confidences and qualms across brands and products, often generating unwanted and unfavorable publicity for companies that fail to deliver.4

In addition to new demands from customers, consumer companies are also feeling pressure from investors and major stakeholders who increasingly see a robust sustainability strategy as an investment qualification. BlackRock CEO Larry Fink, who has repeatedly sounded the importance of ESG in his annual letter to CEOs, recently predicted that capital will be increasingly allocated to those companies with the most sustainable business models, as “sustainability is now becoming the new standard for investing.” This letter reinforces his and others’ message that CEOs and board members must make ESG a high- priority agenda item. This surge of activist investor and consumer involvement has sparked a revolution across the industry, changing business standards and forcing companies to act fast and take a stand on social issues. With this revolution comes the need for new leadership skills. In partnership with the UNGC, Russell Reynolds Associates conducted a series of in-depth interviews and analysis on a group of 55 sustainability pioneers to better understand how organizations can make sustainability core to the DNA of their leadership teams, as well as their strategic goals.

A Rhetoric-Reality Gap

While some consumer companies are embracing sustainability and taking steps to reinvent their business operations, others are falling behind. Many CEOs say sustainability is important, but far fewer are actually taking sufficient action.

Lack of progress toward sustainable development goals (SDGs)

700 million people are in extreme poverty

257 more years to close the economic gender gap at the current pace

On track for 3.5°C temperature rises this century per current commitments

8 million metric tons of plastics enter our oceans every year

CEO rhetoric around sustainable initiatives

92% of CEOs believe integration of sustainability is critical to business success

48% of CEOs are actually integrating sustainability in their operations

21% of CEOs believe business is currently playing a critical role in achieving the SDGs

Source: The Decade to Deliver: A Call to Business Action, The United Nations Global Compact – Accenture Strategy CEO Study on Sustainability, 2019; Leadership for the Decade of Action, UNGC & Russell Reynolds Associates, 2020.

To effectively make progress toward the SDGs, businesses need to focus on multiple components of sustainability simultaneously, looking for ways to positively impact community, employees, environment, and governance. Successful businesses will meet the needs of as many people as possible, utilize minimal resources, and maximize stakeholder engagement.5

Sustainable business metrics should include:

01. Community
Treatment of supply chain partners
Human rights record
Social impact of company's products and services

02.  Employees
Diversity
Labor relations and labor rights
Compensation and benefits
Employee training, healthy and safety

03.  Environment
Use of natural resources
Corporate impact on Earth's ecosystems

04.  Governance
Board independence
Diversity
Executive compensation
Culture of ethical leadership and compliance
Source: CSR Hub Dataset Definitions

As companies seek to transform their operations to address sustainability goals, a logical next step would be to appoint internal leaders such as chief sustainability officers to oversee these initiatives. However, efforts across organizations are not consistent, for some their focus on sustainability equates to haphazardly assigning a title to an internal leader or putting ad-hoc committees together, for others it is assigning budgets, creating a taskforce to tackle the issue and hiring external expertise. In order to accomplish the scale of change required, all senior leaders across the organization need to bring a sustainability lens to their decision making, not just those with a dedicated remit. As part of RRA’s collaboration with the UNGC, we reviewed job specifications for 4000 roles across industries and geographies and found that only 15 percent had requirements related to sustainability. Just 4 percent had role specifications that specifically asked for sustainability experience.6 This job specification analysis underscores the fact that sustainability is not a priority in most executive hiring, highlighting the inherent gap between rhetoric and reality.

Sustainability is not embedded in leadership culture or expectations

15% expectations of role specifications refer to sustainability

4% of role specifications demand sustainability experience or mindsets

Source: Leadership for the Decade of Action, UNGC & Russell Reynolds Associates, 2020

Chief sustainability officers at consumer companies

To gain a clearer perspective of sustainability leadership in the consumer industry, we analyzed leadership teams at 53 publicly-traded consumer companies ranging from multinational consumer products organizations to consumer digital, hospitality, and retail companies. We found that 85 percent of the companies had a sustainability leader, which is positive; that said, these leaders rarely reported into the CEO. Instead, sustainability leaders often wear multiple hats and stretch across functions. From a seniority perspective, the head of sustainability is typically a mid-level role for consumer companies, which is integrated within a function like marketing, corporate affairs, or supply chain. Integration with strategy is often minimal, as the role does not have direct connections to enterprise leadership. Current chief sustainability officers come from strategy, marketing, and public relations/ communications backgrounds and often report into chief marketing officers, chief communications officers, or general counsels.

Functional Backgrounds of Sustainability Leaders

Background

Percentage

Strategy

27%

Marketing

24%

PR/Comms

18%

Compliance

13%

External Affairs / Investor Relations

11%

Commercial/Sales

9%

Human Resources

4%

With 69 percent of consumer sustainability leaders in the position for less than a year and 62 percent internal appointments, consumer-centric organizations are obviously in the nascent stages of building sustainability functions. This data suggests that many are reacting to issues as they emerge and making appointments to satisfy PR and brand concerns but may not be proactively building best-in-class functions.

Current Role Tenure of Consumer Sustainability Leaders

Tenure

Percentage

< 1 year

69%

1-3 years

31%

3-5 years

14%

> 5 years

24%

Internal vs. External appointments

Percentage

Internal

62%

External

38%

Looking forward, in order for organizations to be considered best-in-class, sustainability needs to be embedded in strategy and used to evaluate new opportunities, as well as existing operations. By elevating the role and having dedicated sustainability leaders who are senior members of the firm, ideally sitting on the executive committee, organizations are demonstrating the authenticity of their commitment through action.

A New Kind Of Leader

Sustainability leaders can be classified according to the degree to which their role focuses on internal operations vs. external stakeholder engagement.

The role’s scope is highly dependent on where the organization is in its sustainability lifecycle and where it intends to go. Companies focused on managing reputational risk may choose to have a more externally focused leader, while companies interested in improving their environmental footprint may choose to have a more internally focused leader.

Internal/external operations focus

Focus on partnering with business partnership and driving process improvement (e.g. supply chain)

Common in engineering organizations and organizations focused on improving their environmental footprint

External/stakeholder focus

Focus on external partnerships and customer-facing sustainability initiatives

Common in organizations that are focused on managing reputational risk

Though no two chief sustainability officers are alike, several archetypes have emerged that reflect the varying nature of the role and its objectives: the Strategic Integrator, the Product Innovator, the Operations Guru and the Storyteller.

In order for consumer leaders to move their business to the next phase of growth and make progress on the UN SDGs, they must build internally and externally.

Internally: On an organizational level, sustainability leaders need to interface with a broad range of mission- critical functions and activities including strategy, product, brand, operations, and everything in between

01. Strategy: Sets overall sustainability objectives with strategy in accordance with corporate purpose and mission

02. Operations: Applies sustainability lens to operational processes and decisions, including risk mitigation

03. Brand: Articulates connection between sustainability strategy and corporate purpose to build stakeholder trust

04. Product: Identifies opportunities where sustainability lens can yield new products, markets, or customer segments

Externally: Sustainability leaders need to address three major challenges

01. Building renewed trust: Setting a standard with suppliers, customers, and stakeholders

02. Promoting the value of sustainable business: Opportunities for attracting capital investment

03. Navigating the rapid pace of change: Integrating sustainability into company culture

By engaging relevant stakeholder groups, identifying new opportunities, leveraging existing expertise, and shifting mindsets, consumer companies will be able to start making prominent steps towards a more sustainable future.

Typical Archetypes Of The Chief Sustainability officer

The strategic integrator

Description
Track record of strategy of P&L ownership, integrates priorities across product, operations and brand

Strengths

Strategic visionary capable of managing short-term priorities while pursuing long-term vision

Brings holistic understanding of how sustainability efforts across the organization are mutually reinforcing

Typical Talent Pools

Strategy

BU Leaders

The product innovator

Description
Experience growing sustainable product or service line in response to customer needs and sustainability priorities

Strengths

Embeds sustainability lens into product and service innovation

Disruptive innovator who challenges traditional approaches to eliminate tradeoff between profitability and sustainability

Typical Talent Pools

Strategy

BU Leaders

R&D leaders

Marketing or Product

The operations guru

Description
Track record of transforming operational practices in support of sustainability strategy

Strengths

Systems thinker who thrives on solving complex problems

Strong results orientation who will enable leaders across business to set and meet sustainability KPIs

Typical Talent Pools

Supply chain

Operations

R&D leaders

The storyteller

Description
Experience using data and emotion to tell a sustainability story that connects with stakeholders and builds brand loyalty

Strengths

Deep understanding of customer/stakeholder lens on decision-making

Able to connect tactical sustainability strategy to broader corporate purpose and brand

Typical Talent Pools

Marketing and Communications

Government/ Corporate Affairs

To deliver the financial and social value that sustainability efforts can yield, it is important that leaders across the organization bring a sustainability lens to their work – not just those with an explicit mandate such as a Chief Sustainability Officer. This begins with the adoption of a sustainable mindset: recognizing that business is not a commercial activity removed from its broader society and environment, but instead is inextricably intertwined with both. To succeed, consumer companies must hire, promote, and develop sustainable leadership across functions and roles. To make progress, leaders might consider tying executive compensation to sustainability goals or requiring leaders to articulate a distinct sustainability strategy in each function.

RRA Framework For Identifying Sustainable Leaders

Multi-level systems thinking

Sustainable leaders incorporate the larger business, societal and environmental systems around them to inform decision-making

Long-term activation

Sustainable leaders set audacious sustainability goals and drive concerted action and investments in the pursuit of them

Stakeholder inclusion

Sustainable leaders don’t manage stakeholders, they include them and actively seek to understand a wide range of perspectives

Disruptive innovation

Sustainable leaders possess the courage to challenge traditional approaches and cut through bureaucracy to drive innovation

Source: Leadership for a Decade of Action, UNGC & Russell Reynolds Associates, 2020

Sustainability is not a quick fix; rather, it is a systemic change. In order for businesses to reap maximum rewards, sustainability must be woven into the fabric of the organization and frame all of its operations going forward. Whether organizations are considered nascent, evolving, or best-in-class, the standard is always rising. By having the right leadership, organizations can put themselves in the best position to operate effectively, proactively, and of course, sustainably.

Additional Authors

Greg Hodge leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Knowledge team. He is based in London.
Katelyn Schoenholtz is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector Knowledge team. She is based in New York.

01. Leadership for the Decade of Action, UNGC & Russell Reynolds Associates, 2020.
02. Sustainable Development Goals, United Nations
03. Sustainability for Consumer Business Companies: A Story of Growth, Deloitte
04. Ibid, 4
05. Leadership for the Decade of Action, UNGC & Russell Reynolds Associates, 2020.
06. Ibid, 6

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices