Quick 4: A Q&A on our science-based climate target approval with RRA’s Global Head of Sustainability | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Quick 4: A Q&A on our science-based climate target approval with RRA’s Global Head of Sustainability

The Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) has approved RRA’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction targets. Pam Fitzpatrick, RRA’s Global Head of Sustainability, explains what this means for our firm and our clients.

We have a responsibility to live and breathe the advice we give our clients on how to lead with purpose and make positive contributions to the complex challenges that affect our society and our planet.

Setting emissions reduction targets is an early—and galvanizing—step in tackling climate change, and often the catalyst for examining whether you have the right strategy, processes, and people in place to drive change. As a global leadership advisory firm, it’s particularly important for us to set a precedent.

To approach our own journey with a commitment to meaningful climate action, RRA chose the science-based targets approach to setting GHG emissions reduction goals, which included achieving net-zero GHG emissions across the value chain by 2050.

These targets have now been approved by the Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTi)—a global body that enables organizations to set emissions reduction targets in line with the latest climate science.

To delve deeper into our commitments, how we went about setting them, and why this matters to our firm and our clients, Kurt Harrison, Founder and Co-Head of the Global Sustainability Practice at RRA, sat down with Pam Fitzpatrick, Global Head of Sustainability at RRA.

Pam Fitzpatrick

Global Head of Sustainability at RRA

Kurt Harrison

Founder and Co-Head of the Global Sustainability Practice at RRA

Kurt Harrison: Science-based targets are emerging as the gold standard for climate pledges, offering a more credible and clearly defined pathway for companies to reduce GHG emissions. It’s a huge achievement to get our emissions reduction targets approved by the SBTi. Can you tell us a bit more about the targets that we’ve set out to achieve?

Pam Fitzpatrick: Knowing the climate crisis that the world is facing, it was important for us to lay out commitments that were ambitious and yet achievable. To commit to being part of the solution, we needed goals that were relevant to the way we run our business.

We’re proud as a firm to commit to reducing Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions by 50% by 2030, and to reduce absolute Scope 1, 2, and 3 GHG emissions by 90% by 2050—starting from a baseline that we set in 2019, the first year for which we calculated our firmwide carbon footprint.

We’ve also committed to reducing Scope 3 GHG emissions from business travel by 55% per full-time employee equivalent by 2030.

For us, it’s also important for our suppliers to be climate-conscious, because everyone in our value chain needs to move in the same direction to net-zero emissions. That’s why we’ve also stated that 30% of our suppliers will have science-based targets in place by 2027.

We realize that although we have between now and 2050 to hit our net-zero goals, there’s work we can do right now to have a meaningful impact. Our near-term targets will ensure we take immediate action to tackle climate change. As we look toward 2050, we hope our activity will only accelerate as new technology solutions become available, at scale.

Kurt Harrison: Why was it important for RRA to set these targets?

Pam Fitzpatrick: Climate change is one of the most urgent issues facing our planet today. We’ve long been advising our clients of the need to take action and identify a new type of business leader who could activate sustainability, at scale—leaders who can deliver financial success while also making the long-term sustainability and resilience of our world a top priority.

We’re committed to helping our clients find and develop sustainable leaders to progress their sustainability journeys. When you talk to our colleagues around the world, you’ll find that we’re equally as passionate about advancing our own path to a more sustainable future.

Setting science-based targets is strongly aligned with RRA’s values and culture. By using the science-based targets approach, we can move forward with the confidence that our actions are aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement, and that we’re doing our part to protect the planet.

Kurt Harrison: It’s now about ensuring that we meet those ambitious targets. But first, let’s go back a step. How did you go about creating these targets and gain approval from the SBTi? What did the process involve?

Pam Fitzpatrick: The first step in our journey to getting our science-based targets approved was to calculate the emissions from our business activities, which we then had verified by a third party to give us confidence in its validity. From there, we analyzed the emissions data, which gave us a foundation for working out the level of ambition needed.

Following a rigorous review process in 2023, the SBTi approved our near and long-term science-based emissions reduction targets. It took the team a lot of work to achieve this milestone, so learning that we received approval was a proud moment for us all.

Now comes the real challenge to our entire firm: making changes to our business to meet those goals. It’s our duty to share our progress with our stakeholders. Our annual sustainability report is key to providing this transparency to our clients, colleagues, and value chain partners.

Kurt Harrison: How important is it to your clients that you have these approved targets in place?

Pam Fitzpatrick: Our clients are making bold commitments to impact climate change by cutting their GHG emissions. But, to achieve these goals, they need their value chain partners to do their part: Our emissions count as their emissions, and we can only get to net-zero emissions by working together.

We believe that the approval of our science-based targets by the SBTi—a step that none of our direct competitors have yet achieved—will show our clients that we’re taking our emissions reduction commitments seriously, and in turn, will make us an even more compelling business partner. It’s about moving forward on our climate journey together with the rigor of climate science and a commitment to trust.

RRA’s approved science-based targets

Overall Net-Zero Target

Russell Reynolds Associates commits to reach net-zero GHG emissions across the value chain by 2050.

Near-Term Targets

Russell Reynolds Associates commits to reduce absolute scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions 50% by 2030 from a 2019 base year. Russell Reynolds Associates also commits to reduce scope 3 GHG emissions from business travel by 55% per full-time employee equivalent within the same timeframe. Russell Reynolds Associates further commits that 30% of its suppliers by emissions, covering purchased goods and services, capital goods and upstream transportation and distribution will have science-based targets by 2027.

Long-Term Targets

Russell Reynolds Associates commits to reduce absolute scope 1, 2, and 3 GHG emissions by 90% by 2050 from a 2019 base year.

Read the Press Release

Sustainable LeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionDevelopment and Transition

A Beacon in the Storm: C-suite Mentoring as a Leadership Imperative

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipCulture RiskSuccessionFinancial ServicesPrivate CapitalVenture Capital and GrowthConsumer & Commercial Financial ServicesFinTechGlobal Banking and MarketsInsuranceInvestment ManagementPrivate CreditInvestment ManagementReal EstateFinTechBoard and CEO AdvisoryChief Executive OfficersLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingBoard Director and Chair SearchCEO SuccessionC-Suite SuccessionCulture AnalyticsDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

From Risk Management to Risk Navigation: Why Strategic Risk Officers Have Never Been So Vital – Or So Challenged – in Financial Services

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices