The CEO and Board Playbook for Leadership Through Technology Transformation | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The CEO and Board Playbook for Leadership Through Technology Transformation

Technology and InnovationBoard Composition and SuccessionTransformation and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryDevelopment and Transition

Article

April 17, 2020

6 min

Technology and InnovationBoard Composition and SuccessionTransformation and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Improving direct communications with consumers through an integrated omni-channel approach improves the customer experience.

Close

Tristan Jervis

London

Tuck Rickards

San Francisco

Crossing The Digital Divide: The Urgent And Immediate Imperative

A decade into the conversation about “digital transformation,” CEOs and boards continue to struggle to convert their legacy businesses into tech- and data-enabled, customer-centric organizations. Many still fail to sufficiently evolve their organizations’ technology and data capabilities and do not take a holistic approach to create an integrated, connected-customer business strategy. As we tackle the ongoing global pandemic, the risks of being on the wrong side of the digital divide have become increasingly apparent. Based on thousands of client engagements, Russell Reynolds Associates has developed a framework to support CEOs and boards as they navigate this journey in an increasingly dynamic and volatile environment.

Technology Transformation Playbook for Boards and CEOs

01. A 2019 MIT study shows that having multiple tech-savvy directors on the board contributes to above-market performance in both revenue and profitability.

02. Address the CEO succession conundrum – Most companies have potential CEO successors who either have large-scale P&L experience or innovation and disruption experience. Neither of these is ideal. Companies need to think about how they can create new roles that allow potential successors to work across this divide.

03. Leveraging direct connectivity to the consumer with an integrated omnichannel approach will move customer experience to the next level.

04. From Finance and HR to Supply Chain, digitizing core functions will increase efficiency and capabilities by capturing and assimilating data and driving toward an insight-driven organization.

05.The most progressive organizations are behaving like technology companies, developing flexible, secure, and scalable platforms, led by a single tech and data leader, reporting directly to the CEO.

06. Successful organizations focus on a more agile culture as a critical element of a transformation strategy.

Best-in-class Transformations

The following are examples of industry-leading organizations that have thought holistically about the leadership implications of tech-enabling their entire business and have achieved significant transformation as a result. While some of the examples below are of large global organizations, we’ve seen these strategies play out for companies of all sizes, including in the private equity sphere where investors are bringing technology operating partners onto their teams to drive transformation across their portfolio.

Legacy media and entertainment company re-organized to create a new streaming business

Brought tech and digital talent to the board early including Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg (on Disney board 2010 – 2018), Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey (2013 – 2018), Oracle CEO Safra Catz (2018 – present), and Illumina CEO Francis deSouza (2018 – present)

Focused on the strategic acquisition of a tech company that allowed the company to pivot the business model and embrace streaming.

Attracted digital talent, integrating them into the organization, and investing in their long-term success.

Moved from legacy to digitally enable with new fintech platform

Recruited tech talent to the board including former Apple CFO Peter Oppenheimer (on Goldman Sach’s board 2014 – present) and former Goldman Sachs Divisional Head of Operations & Technology David Alan Viniar (2013 – present).

Built a fintech platform called Marcus, which was originally built as an online lending platform and then scaled to hold $60 billion in consumer deposits. Marcus aims to contribute $1 billion in revenue by the end of 2020.

Positioned organization to attract tech talent starting with the CEO declaring Goldman a “technology firm”’ and then hiring Charles Elkan (previously machine learning director for Amazon) and Marco Argenti (previously Amazon VP of IoT, Serverless, Mobile, AR/VR).

Traditional show manufacturer to digitally connected, customer-centric business

Recruited tech talent to the board including Deloitte Managing Principal Cathy Benko (on Nike board 2018 – present), IBM CMO and Digital Sales SVP Michelle Peluso (2014 – present), and Apple CEO Tim Cook (2016 – present.

Introduced a tech-savvy CEO, hiring John Donohoe (previously CEO of ServiceNow and former CEO of eBay) to prioritize digital experience and eCommerce for sustainable revenue growth.

Increased D2C through digital platforms and products by prioritizing digital customer experience and data analysis. This led to personalized digital products, with direct-to-consumer accounting for 1/3 of Nike revenue.

Store-based retailers developed true omnichannel approach to customers

Created a new customer-centric digital role and mandate to develop digital offerings and omnichannel capability and hired former GrubHub CMO and Google Express marketing head Barbara Martin Coppola to fill it.

Digitized core functions from customer fulfillment and engagement to warehouse inventory and supply chain to support the new operating model.

Built a new highly credible technology function led by a new chief technology officer, Susan Standiford (previously Zeal Networks COO/CTO), who reports to the chief digital officer, Barbara Martin Coppola.

Transitioned from hardware to software and IoT centric

Recruited tech talent to the board including former SAP CFO and interim CHRO Dr. Werner Brandt (on CONAME board 2018 – present) and former SAP Co-CEO Jim Hagemann Snabe (2013 – present).

Focused on advanced technologies by divesting its oil and gas business and redeploying capital to the Digital Industries and Smart Infrastructure businesses focused on energy efficiency, renewable power storage, distributed power, and electric vehicle mobility.

Drove firm-wide culture change which started in 2014 with a plan called “Vision 2020” that fostered more of an “ownership culture.”

Built core tech and digital capabilities to enable all aspects of the business

Recruited tech talent to the board including Mary Ellen Coe, Google’s president of global customer solutions (onboard 2019 – present) and former Accenture managing partner and CFO Pamela J Craig (2015 – present).

Combined data into a single analytics platform, allowing data from the laboratories and manufacturing to feed into a common, advanced analytics platform.

Created a progressive digital and tech role by restructuring the organization to combine technology and digital functions under one leader who was elevated to the ExCo level.

Data-driven customer centricity

Revamped CEO succession process to focus on progressive skill sets such as changing culture, improving customer experience, promoting customer-related innovation, and utilizing data effectively in the new CEO profile.

Aligned go-to-market and digital functions under one leader, hiring Atif Rafiq (previously CDIO, Volvo Cars USA) as president of Commercial & Growth to own the customer lifecycle from digital product management to UX and driving transformation.

Combined and utilized data pools, connecting the data from various business units and enhancing analytic capability to become a truly data-driven organization.

Digitizing across functions to become the world's most connected brewer

Recruited tech talent to the board including former SAP CIO Ingrid-Helen Arnold (on Heineken board 2019 – present) and Rosemary L Ripley, MD NGen Partners LLC (2019 – present).

United core functions on a single platform using an integrated business planning approach. Now in its sixth year, Heineken’s partnership with JDA Software is focused on uniting supply chain, sales, marketing, finance, and procurement on one cloud-based platform.

Created a progressive digital and tech role, appointing former Heineken USA MD Ronald den Elzen as its first Chief Digital and Technology Officer, reporting directly to the CEO, and bolstering him with direct reports for both data and analytics.

Questions CEOs and Boards should be asking:

True transformation requires alignment between the organization’s strategic objectives and its leadership and cultural needs:

01. Have you ensured that you have the right digital and technology skillsets in the board room to see future disruption and to challenge the organization on how well it is leveraging digital and technology?

02. Do you have a leadership succession plan that supports and advances your technology-driven strategy, and develops a bench of capable leaders with both operating scale and technology acumen?

03. How do you enable and empower your next-gen digital talent and tech ecosystems to support this new organization?

04. Where do you require new talent and new roles to bolster digital and tech capabilities, and where should you invest in the reskilling and training of the existing workforce (mobilizing the “middle” of the organization around next-generation skill sets and decision-making)?

05. What needs to change to align your front-end and back-end technology functions under a single leader and digitize the core business functions in between?

06. Is your culture a significant barrier to digital transformation, cross-functional agile collaboration and/or data-driven decision making?

Additional Authors

George Head is a Knowledge Associate for the Technology Officers Practice, based in London. Working broadly across the technology sector, George is focused on identifying emerging trends and codifying the priorities outlined by our clients.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices