5 Key Considerations for Candidate Engagement in Today’s Crisis | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

5 Key Considerations for Candidate Engagement in Today’s Crisis

Leadership StrategiesCareer AdviceLeadershipHuman Resources OfficersExecutive Search

Article

March 18, 2020

3 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer AdviceLeadershipHuman Resources OfficersExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Companies with “in-person” requirements may want to make exceptions as more and more firms offer remote options.

Close

Great candidate engagement has always mattered - it can be the difference between getting a great candidate and losing one. The COVID-19 crisis is throwing up a a multitude of new challenges. How organizations deal with them will be hugely important to keeping hiring processes moving and maintaining strong talent pipelines for once the crisis has passed,

Keeping Candidates Engaged Will be Harder

Your candidates are likely dealing with a lot of change in their own jobs right now – helping coordinate response efforts, reviewing budgets and working through “what if” scenario planning (which will include questions about their own hiring plan). This will have a spillover effect on how they think about your job opportunity. They will naturally wonder how committed your company is to this hiring process.

Be sure to emphasize your commitment to making this hire and over what timeframe. Reiterate how this role connects to the long-term strategy of the firm. If relevant, highlight how the current crisis further clarifies the importance of this role or the skills and experience the candidate has.

The Risk of Moving Jobs Will Feel Higher

The current situation will invariably make people more conservative in their decision making. Make sure you have a solid understanding of how they are approaching their decision and resist the temptation to sell.

Instead, focus on advising them and creating connections that can help them make their decision – connect them with future colleagues who can give them a good view into culture and strategy, and make relevant internal (non-confidential) materials available to them.

“In-person” Requirements Will Delay Decision Making

If your policies are not flexible on this matter, then now is the time to discuss making exceptions if you are already experiencing or anticipate office closures and other measures that may make in-person meetings problematic. It is also worth noting that some candidates may not be able to, or want to travel and meet due to their current employer’s guidance, local government guidance/restrictions or their personal situation and preferences.

We’d suggest implementing two tactics to help facilitate comfort with deploying offers in this scenario:

Double down on video – make sure all interviews are video based and have interviewers that conducted phone calls previously “re-meet” the candidate over video.

Do additional referencing checking in order to build confidence amongst the hiring team in their decision.
If either the company or candidate are uncomfortable making a final decision solely based on virtual interaction, consider making an offer with mutually agreed terms that the offer and its acceptance is contingent on a later in-person meeting.

Market Volatility May Derail Your Offer

Markets have fallen dramatically, and volatility is high at the moment. The potential of a second half of the year turnaround may create two important challenges when building an offer package.

Your finalist candidate may have a long-term incentive plan that has had significant impact to its value. Communicate early and agree on the methodology for valuing that stock, as you create a buy-out package. Consider using a more realistic share-price proxy like a 30 day average or the mid-point between the high and low over a set period of time.

Also, should the candidate need to relocate, uncertainty in the housing market may be a more significant factor, so be clear on program details and how flexible you can be (e.g., longer timeframe for moving, longer temporary housing coverage, potential home buy-out).

Nailing Down a Start-Date is Going to be Complicated

Deferring start dates may be one logical approach, but this increases the likelihood of the candidate changing their mind or succumbing to a counteroffer. The key here is communication, communication, communication. Be sure to establish a thorough understanding of your new hire’s situation:

What are their personal needs and attitudes at the moment?

What are the restrictions they face on their movement given local government guidance or edicts?

If you do need to have them start in a work-from home scenario, make sure:

You can get them the IT equipment they need in advance and appropriately support them on setting it up.

Get them connected virtually using video with their team and core stakeholders early and often.

Overemphasize sessions that connect them with others with whom they will be working and ensure they have several buddies they can contact with day-to-day questions.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices