Lessons from the Offseason: What companies can learn from the NFL about building the perfect team | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Lessons from the Offseason: What companies can learn from the NFL about building the perfect team

LeadershipTeam Performance

Article

Dean Stamoulis

August 15, 2018

min

LeadershipTeam Performance

Close

Dean Stamoulis

Atlanta

With reams of player data and an offseason that dedicates at least three full months per year to slicing and dicing it, NFL teams have an ideal set of circumstances in which to construct a winning team.

I recently talked to several general managers and personnel executives at top teams in the league to probe what they consider most important to a successful offseason. Collectively, they offer three key lessons that corporate leaders can put into play.

1 - Build the team for the next championship, not the last one:

With a 53-player limit, crafting a team roster is a zero-sum game. Every offseason involves assessing the current team against external talent that might be available through the college draft, free agency, or trades. It also involves a knack for predicting the future.

“The mistake is to feel like ‘We’re making strides, so let’s keep going in same direction,’” said Jacksonville Jaguars general manager David Caldwell.

A key screen in “self-scouting,” or the practice of assessing the current team, is whether a player is ascending (perhaps a newer player who hasn’t yet reached potential), descending (often an experienced player who may not have the physical skills he used to but has key leadership skills), or simply plateauing. One is not necessarily better than another - every team needs a mix of growing and seasoned players – but it’s important to understand what to expect from each one in the season ahead.

It’s not a perfect science under any circumstances, but experienced coaches and front office staffs realize that past results don’t always predict future performance. Last season’s star player may look indomitable - or a new college prospect may seem superior to last year’s rookie –– but the question is, how will they perform next season?

“Whether it’s a college player we’ve brought in, or a pro free agent – even players who have been in the league four or five years - we typically see a tremendous amount of growth in the first year they’re with us,” said a scouting director for a top NFL team.

For companies: It’s important to look beyond an employee’s current contributions and analyze whether he or she is on track to offer what the company will need in the future.

2 - Get away from the emotion:

“If you end the season three and thirteen, it seems no one is good enough,” said Caldwell. That’s why he asks each member of his staff to independently record notes and ideas for improvement at the end of each season -- and then take some time off to clear their heads. More formally, the staff will review each player three times over the course of the year, going back to video footage and notes as necessary throughout the offseason to ensure the assessment is thorough and accurate.

Les Snead, general manager for the Los Angeles Rams, does the same, tagging the first, postseason review “the emotional review” and the second, later review the “unemotional” one. “You definitely see a difference when you step back,” said Snead.

The emphasis on multiple reviews means the team is more likely to see the potential that develops in players during their tenure. “When someone comes in as an immature player, you may have that first impression in mind three or four years down the road, even after they’ve physically and mentally matured,” said Caldwell.

Advice for companies: Make talent review conversations a more frequent part of meetings, so that the thread of discussion occurs independently from isolated events and outcomes.

3 - Be transparent:

Over his tenure, Snead has opened up roster reviews, which are in-depth assessments of each current player, to the entire coaching staff, and has become more transparent about the information that is shared.

“If we trust that staff member to have an impact on one of our most valuable assets – one of our 53 players – they should be in the room,” said Snead.

His goal is not just to help colleagues feel engaged, but also to manage internal politicking and conflicts. Different experts may have different perspectives – for example, the strength staff may give a player a gold star, while the nutrition staff expresses concerns – but in the end, they all need to see the big picture as to why the player does or does not deserve a spot on the team. “The number one mantra is we’ve got to be able to have direct conversations,” said Snead. “Sharing the info only makes us all better.” From there, a key next step is to build a plan and a team of staff members to support that player in reaching his potential.

Advice for companies: Look for ways to actively involve diverse parties in the discussions leading up to key hiring and promotion decisions. Make rationales clear and objective.

Bringing it in

Corporate executives face a different set of circumstances than football executives do, yet the core elements of successful offseason planning can transcend these differences. It starts with gaining perspective on what the organization needs for its next season, assessing talent over time and from multiple vantage points, and then engaging key stakeholders to create a holistic understanding of the vision. Bragging rights aside, corporate organizations – which can build excellent teams that last years rather than months -- may face even greater rewards than a Lombardi trophy.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices