The Great Reset | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Great Reset

Leadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceFinancial ServicesSustainability OfficersDevelopment and Transition

Article

Clarke Murphy

February 01, 2021

2 min

Leadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceFinancial ServicesSustainability OfficersDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The need for sustainable leadership – where a new breed of leaders take on the world’s global challenges – continues to grow in importance.

Close

Clarke Murphy

Stamford

Typically, at this time of year, you would have found me high up in the Swiss Alps surrounded by thousands of the world’s top leaders addressing the most pressing issues on the global agenda. But the pandemic has forced a transformation in the way we collaborate. The World Economic Forum (WEF), which normally meets in Davos, Switzerland, for its annual meeting, has gone virtual in 2021 with the “Davos Agenda.” Global leaders are convening this year to talk about “The Great Reset,” how global institutions emerge from the COVID crisis with economic and social systems for a more fair, sustainable and resilient future. It is an important topic—and no small challenge.

The global leaders who have spoken so far have quickly coalesced around two core themes: multilateralism and coordinated collaboration for economic and environmental solutions.

Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel declared that “this is the hour of multilateralism” and that “we must avoid the building of blocs.” China’s President Xi was quite bold in his remarks, saying that the global outlook “remains uncertain” and that we “need to follow a path with governments of peaceful coexistence.” French President Macron envisioned building “a multilateral system that will allow a new consensus.” And in a surprise, unscheduled address, Russian President Putin warned that “a collapse of global development might cause a fight of all against all.”

In the breakout meetings and sidebar conversations—which are dominated by business leaders—climate change remains at the top of the agenda. But both business and government leaders recognize that they need both groups to act in order to make significant progress.

Leaders of AXA, Banco Santander, Takeda, BlackRock, Siemens, Mahindra Steel, Accenture and others have all placed climate change at the forefront of their agendas. BlackRock’s Larry Fink, presenting alongside the CEOs of Carlyle and BAML, delivered a powerful message by showing data around ESG returns and the progress those companies have made. (And if you have not already seen it, you should read his annual letter to CEOs, in which he emphasizes the importance of addressing this crisis.) Anand Mahindra (a participant in our sustainable leader research) perhaps said it best when he remarked, “It is not profit or sustainability, but rather profit through sustainability.”

Innovation, sustainability, radical change in supply chains and the growing vulnerability of many people in our world are the dominant themes in almost every meeting or discussion. How will the private and public sectors collaborate with NGOs to collectively make progress in the world? How can we collectively create change?

While none of us are physically together, we are not losing the ability to connect. Rather than the standard 20 minutes over coffee that happens in person, we are scheduling Zoom calls to compare notes and share reflections. Regardless of the specifics of each meeting or event—rapidly changing business models, the importance of hearing from executives with fresh perspectives, leaders driving innovation—we always return to the critical question of how to improve the way the world is led. Once again, I am reminded of the need for sustainable leadership – a new breed of leaders that are ready to address these big issues of our time – those that will champion “The Great Reset.” Read more about the characteristics and attributes that came out in our research titled: Leadership For the Decade of Action.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices