Leveraging brand to shape what is next, right now | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Leveraging Brand To Shape What Is Next, Right Now

Industry TrendsSustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionCustomer Activation and GrowthExecutive SearchDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

Article

March 03, 2021

3 min

Industry TrendsSustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesInclusionCustomer Activation and GrowthExecutive SearchDevelopment and TransitionTeam Performance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We have transformed our brand to better highlight our values to customers as leadership needs continue to change across the world.

Close

One principle has become eminently clear across the last year: to thrive in the world of tomorrow – one that will be informed and shaped by COVID, social justice efforts, environmental and economic crises, and technological shifts of an unknowable scale – organizations will need a different type of leader.

This is what we do at Russell Reynolds Associates (RRA): find the right leaders for our clients to shape what is next, right now. the dramatic changes the world and the business landscape faced in 2020 underscored the critical importance of how we help our clients. It also exposed an opportunity for us to clarify how, exactly, we improve the way the world is led.

Telling our story consistently, and enabling our colleagues to share it, is a crucial part of this. We are thrilled to activate our refreshed brand and voice in the marketplace – sharing our process and why we have landed where we have with you.

Who we are: Russell Reynolds Associates is dynamic, discerning, brave and purposeful

We unanimously agreed to retain RRA’s longstanding purpose of improving the way the world is led. This remains core to the firm’s day-to-day and long-term vision. to emphasize the people-centric and human way we work, our team thought about RRA as a living and breathing entity with human characteristics. Throughout the refresh process, we accentuated the human traits that would help bring the brand to life, unveiling the firm’s persona as dynamic, discerning, brave and purposeful.

The next phase was analyzing key client analytics and putting pen to paper, defining why our clients partner with us. Notably, we sought to delineate this in a way that encompasses the wide range of perspectives and expertise each colleague, consultant and client provided. We discovered many attributes that are encoded into the DNA of the firm, but that we haven’t traditionally brought to the forefront in our communications. Under our refreshed brand, we are emphasizing how:

01. We treat clients’ organizations like they are our own.
02. We bring an inclusion and culture team.
03. We uncover relevance.
04. We challenge with purpose.
05. We unlock their best.

For us, it is not just about finding the right candidate, but about the outcome. It is ensuring the leaders we support are successful. It is helping our clients to understand that critical issues around inclusion and culture and sustainability are no longer optional or “nice to have,” but imperative.

The way we go to market and our collective expertise are a significant driver of our brand. In a sea of sameness, we recognize a clear opportunity to show up differently and emphasize the human-centric way we work – and reflect all the ways we are boldly improving the way the world is led.

Through our brand, we help shape a brighter future

Monumental disruptions are constantly redefining the business landscape, showing there is no such thing as a “far off” future. Change is accelerating at a rapid pace, impacting tomorrow’s business prospects today. Many organizations are assessing their needs in terms of the type of leaders who will be able to help them usher in the next phase of growth amid both current and future headwinds.

We are evolving the RRA brand to stand out and help organizations thrive in the world of tomorrow. It is imperative that our clients understand that by partnering with RRA, they are receiving a mix of expertise, empathy and compassion in everything that we do.

By better telling the RRA story, we can show up for them as a partner that is purposeful and committed to their success. One that can shape a brighter, more equitable future for tomorrow’s leaders. And one that, person by person, is helping clients set progress in motion and reshape what the future looks like – for organizations, our communities and the world.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices