Ensuring Assessment Quality In Virtual Interviews | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Ensuring Assessment Quality in Virtual Interviews

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceHuman Resources OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive Search

Article

March 30, 2020

5 min

Leadership StrategiesCareer TransitionsCareer AdviceEnvironmental Social and GovernanceHuman Resources OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Consider setting aside an extra 15 minutes at the beginning of a virtual interview for small talk to help destress a candidate.

Close

Interview-based assessments are a critical element of an effective executive hiring process. They can be conducted very effectively in a virtual environment – and indeed, the current situation notwithstanding, many already are. That said, the COVID-19 pandemic creates added dynamics that are important to consider. While much has been written about the logistics and technical etiquette of virtual interviews (which we also address here), relatively little has been said about best practices for ensuring that virtual interviews result in high-quality assessments of candidates.

Our assessment experts have identified a set of key lessons for ensuring that your virtual interview-based assessments remain highly impactful and produce the required results despite the added complexities.

Get the logistics in order

Make sure the logistics of your setup are rock-solid: You know how to login to your video conferencing platform, your camera is positioned correctly, and your audio and microphone work. Most importantly, ensure that you have provided your candidate with clear instructions on how to use the platform well in advance of the session. Encourage them to double check that their technology works as it should, and offer them the opportunity to do a quick technology test the day before the interview.

On the day of the interview, connect 5-10 minutes early so you can make sure everything is up and running and you can troubleshoot technical issues without consuming interview time. Even seemingly small details like lighting – which will affect how well you can see and engage with one another – should be resolved ahead of time. Make sure you have identified a Plan B in advance. For example, if the video fails, are you going to reschedule the call, move to a different platform, or simply go ahead with just audio? While you may do virtual interviews all the time without incident, don’t underestimate the volume of traffic that video conference platforms are dealing with now, and the problems that may arise as a result.

(For more logistical pointers see 7 Simple Tips and Reminders for Successful Video Interviewing.)

Set the right tone

Virtual interactions require an intentional, thoughtful effort to set the right tone. Acknowledge the situation, take the time to ask the candidate at the start whether they are comfortable and happy with their setup, and if they can see and hear you clearly. Even if this ends up eating into your interview time, it will be invaluable for ensuring a successful conversation. Take the time to clearly lay out the agenda for the discussion, topics to discuss, and how you want to divide the time, so that the candidate can manage the time they spend on their answers. Virtual interactions lack many of the common cues used to indicate that you want a candidate to speed up or slow down. Consider telling the candidate at the outset that you may ask them to speed up or slow down precisely because of this. You can agree with them that you may do this verbally, or that you will prompt them visually with a gesture.

(Re)Design your assessment approach appropriately

It is always critical to bring a structured, thoughtful approach to interviews. But, in a fully virtual environment, there are several important, additional considerations:

Building Rapport: It can be harder to build rapport virtually. Consider setting aside an extra 10-15 minutes at the start of the discussion for small talk. People are anxious in these circumstances at the best of times. Do not underestimate the additional stress your candidate may be experiencing now.

Co-interviewing: If you are interviewing with colleagues, it is important that your interplay is seamless. Consider choreographing the interview. What role is each person going to play, which questions/topics are they going to cover, and how will you transition between one another? Use explicit verbal prompts with your colleagues to avoid accidentally interrupting each other (e.g., ask your colleague whether they have anything they would like to ask). Many interviewers are tempted to use instant messaging or texting to communicate back and forth, but doing so will be distracting to you and off-putting to the candidate.

Right Question Set: Addressing career history, strategic impact and results is generally not an issue in a virtual interview. There is, however, a dulled sense of interpersonal impact via video. It is therefore critical to double down on questions that can reveal strengths and weaknesses in this area, for example:

What will references say about the strengths and weaknesses of your leadership style?

Can you provide an example of an organization-wide initiative in which you played a key role? What impact did you have?

Can you describe an example of how you have addressed performance that did not meet your expectations?

Can you tell me about a situation in which you had to “jump start” your team’s motivation after a setback?

How are you supporting your team through the current uncertainty?

If I worked with you on a day-to-day basis for a year, what emotions would I see from you?

Virtual communication is a skill set in and of itself

As the nature of work changes, our expectations of leaders is shifting. Being able to communicate effectively on virtual platforms is an important skill. With due consideration to some of the constraints of today’s situation, be sure to assess how effective the candidate is at communicating in this environment. In addition to the conversation itself, consider asking specific questions about managing in a virtual environment:

What challenges have you faced managing virtual teams and how have you overcome them?

How have you created a sense of community across a virtual team?

How do you approach performance management and the development of team members that are not co-located with you?

Check yourself for biases

Many individuals are working at home, not because they choose to, but because they must. Add to that a spouse, partner or children that are also home, and you quickly have a complex environment that few individuals are accustomed to operating within. Beyond the potential for distraction, this adds a new set of potential biases that can influence the assessment, such as drawing conclusions based on what a candidate’s home looks like. It is incumbent on interviewers to guard against these biases. Put yourself in their shoes: What might they incorrectly deduce about you given the environment you are working in?

One very simple technique here is to spend some time upfront asking about their current situation and sharing a little about yours.

Be vigilant about how the current situation might influence your judgment

Psychological research on stress shows that it affects how we make decisions, with some people more likely to engage in risky decisions, and others more likely to engage in more conservative decision making. We are operating in unusual circumstances today and many of us are dealing with heightened levels of professional and personal stress as a result. Reflect on how this impacts you. In particular, you may be at risk of being biased toward “safe bet” candidates with conventional profiles and miss the opportunity to hire talent with nontraditional backgrounds. This bias could have real implications for the diversity of your candidate slate.

Be sure to be hyper-vigilant about how you are interpreting and weighing information. Invest extra time in discussing with colleagues what your assessment of each candidate was, how you reached that conclusion, and how you are applying that information to advance your decision making.

Checklist: Preparing for virtual interview-based assessments

It is good practice to help your candidate prepare for a virtual interview. We suggest providing the following information and resources:

Overview of the session, types of information you are after, and ways they may prepare (e.g., considering key career turning-points and learnings)

Link to interviewer biographies

Instructions on how to use the video conferencing platform (including, if appropriate, how to set a neutral virtual background)

Contact phone number and email address in case of technical difficulties

Additionally, remember that the fundamentals of good interview-based executive assessments still apply:

Be clear about the criteria associated with the job that you are interviewing for and design interview questions that are closely linked to the criteria

Use open-ended questions and probe for specific examples to understand exactly what approach the individual took (rather than hypothetical approaches)

Seek examples of both successes and setbacks or failures and probe to understand what the leader has learned and how they have applied those lessons

Take as many verbatim notes as possible and try to suspend judgement until post interview when you can review the evidence in totality

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices