Interview with Cardinal Health Chairman & CEO George Barrett | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Cardinal Health Chairman & CEO George Barrett

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 15, 2022

8.5 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

George Barrett, Cardinal Health’s Chairman and CEO, discusses splitting the roles, the board’s role in innovation and healthcare companies leading by example.

PLAY VIDEO

An Edited Transcript

Chapter 1: The Chairman and the CEO: To split or not to split

Roger Crockett: George, there’s been a running governance debate about whether companies should split
their chairman and CEO roles. Of course, your board rejected a shareholder proposal to split.
Explain what the decision was there.

George Barrett: Yeah, we can look at this without a prescriptive perspective on whether or not companies automatically
should separate the role of chairman and CEO. I think we regard it as situational. For us, particularly coming
out of the spin-off of our medical device company, it was so important for us to have alignment between the
board and the management on where we were going, on the design of our strategy, even on some of the
re-thinking about what the board should look like, that we felt that combining those roles provided alignment.

Combining that with the idea of having a very strong presiding director—our lead director John Finn—who
does a fantastic job of leading our independent directors. From a governance standpoint we think that
provides the checks and balances and serves our shareholders very well.

Roger Crockett: Well are there certain factors that boards should consider when they’re trying to make that
decision about whether to split or not? What do you feel?

George Barrett: Yeah, I think boards need to serve their shareholders. And ultimately the question is having the right checks
and balances, the right separation of operational roles and activities. I think for us we’ve done a lot of work in
defining the role of a lead director. But as I said, for us it was very, very important to have the right alignment
between the chairman of the board and the management team. And we think combining those roles for us
at that moment was the right decision. We can certainly respect that other companies and other boards
could come to a different conclusion. I think it really is situational around their strategy, around their board of
directors, and really how they feel like they’ll best serve their shareholders.

Chapter 2: Transformational Leadership: “The board is the strategy committee.”

Roger Crockett: Well, of course many industries are in the midst of massive change, including yours, the
healthcare industry. How critical is it amidst that change to re-invent a company, and how do
you recommend a management team go about that reinvention?

George Barrett: Well, the word reinvention is used a lot these days and probably means a lot of different things to different
folks. I think for us this is a time of extraordinary change. It is for many businesses, but certainly those of us
in healthcare realize that we’re in a system that’s undergoing a lot of unique pressures. You’ve got enormous
population health issues. You’ve got still a large number of uninsured or under-insured Americans. You’ve
got issues of public health, and issues around demographics that are really creating a huge challenge when
you think about the economic impact for us. So we’ve thought a lot about the reinvention of the company
and I think all companies need to do this. I think the constant evaluation of where you are, what your
portfolio looks like in the midst of changes is a critical thing for us. So we’ve devoted a lot of attention to this.

We’ve created a strategy council that meets regularly, rather than thinking of strategy at a unique moment
in time, once a year. It’s an ongoing process for us. We’ve talked a lot about the notion of how innovation
in a service business is actually just as important as innovation in a product business. We all tend to think of
innovation as the iPod for example, or a product. But in a business undergoing huge change, in a system
undergoing huge change, innovation can also be thinking about different ways of doing business. And what
we think of as business innovation is just as powerful as product innovation. So at a time of huge change,
we’ve tried to create a culture in which people are both executing on day-to-day blocking and tackling, but
also thinking about some of those changes and how we need to compete in a world that is probably going to
look so much different than the world we have today.p>

Roger Crockett: You mentioned that your [executive management team] tries to look at that situation often. How
often do you have to meet in order to stay on top of this and not let it pass you by?

George Barrett: Well there are two answers to that question. One is that I think it is a continuous process. So I think strategy
is not a moment or an activity or a department, it’s a process that you embark on all the time. We have
certain ways of governing our organization that help us with that. So, for example, our executive committee
meets every week. Now again, those are not always the big compelling strategy discussions, but every week
we touch on things that really reflect or at least are very related to the strategic direction for the company.
The council does meet at sort of regular intervals and that can be episodic, but probably in the last four
months we’ve met five times. It just allows us to make sure that we’re surfacing the issues that don’t exist
in the everyday dialogue. And that’s really important. You never know what is happening on your periphery
unless you actually get a chance to surface those issues and discuss them. So we regard this as pretty active
process and engage our board in this discussion as well.

Roger Crockett: Does your board also have a strategy committee that meets regularly to assess these things, and
do you think that that’s a good idea for a board to address that landscape?

George Barrett: Some boards do. Actually, to me the board is the strategy committee. So what we do, and what we’ve been
doing for a number of years now, is at every one of our board meetings we touch on certain strategic issues.
But we also set out a separate strategy session where we really do not discuss the day-to-day operating
performance, but really focus on the big issues of our environment, of our core capabilities, and how those
two things are aligned and what we need to do strategically. So we really have a series of steps. We actually
do it in a bit of a two-step process where we surface certain issues, we spend a day reviewing critical
strategic aspects of the business, and then in the next few months, we actually come back based on some
feedback with the board and we re-visit some of those key issues and chart the course. So for us it’s a very
important dialogue between the management team and the board of directors.

Chapter 3: Being nimble is critical in today’s healthcare industry.

Roger Crockett: Now Cardinal is big, over a hundred billion dollars in revenue, but you still manage to move pretty
quickly. How?

George Barrett: We’re trying. It’s not always easy. I describe this as a force of gravity. I do think that there are certain
things that come with growth and with size. There are almost gravitational pulls. You don’t even see them
happening, but they happen. You have a tendency to get slower, more bureaucratic, a little more hierarchical.
I think that is an insidious creep that can occur with all companies. So my perspective is that if it is a force of
gravity and something you don’t see, you have to actively fight it all the time. So that’s a constant battle that
we wage to make sure that we’re nimble, that we’re fast. Healthcare is moving in amazingly quick darts. So
for us, it’s very, very important, in spite of our size, to be able to move quickly, to be able to assess and move
fast. So you just try to create a culture in which people understand that we have to fight those gravitational
forces. You’ve got to model the behavior you want. You’ve got to be able to move quickly. You can’t spend
all your days in meeting after meeting after meeting. You’ve got to be able to say, ‘Look we’re going to move,
we’re going to set some tight timelines, and move quickly.’

So on the one hand as a big company you’ve got to make sure that you’re governing yourself with the right
controls, but you have to remain nimble. And for me it’s partly surfacing that as an issue for our team and for
the entire organization to say look we’re big but we’re going to have to be extremely agile.

Chapter 4: Changing the healthcare system: “We can’t say it and not live it.”

Roger Crockett: A lot of companies talk about the health and well-being of their people. But Cardinal has been
recognized for doing a good job at it. What are the keys, and how important is it to have a
healthy and happy workforce?

George Barrett: The other side of the equation is people taking ownership of their own health, our own wellness. We’ve tried
to make that part of our discussion with our own employees and part of our life here. So we give incentives
for wellness. We make it easier for people to participate in those things. We’ve got a health center that
we subsidize that helps people to get access to the opportunity for exercise. We’ve changed our cafeteria
offerings so that we’ve got more healthy choices for people. We’ve made available the tools to help deal
with weight management and smoking cessation. So I think tackling those community health issues is very
important for us as a society. And as a business we know that whenever they’re healthy, the population is
happier, it’s more productive and it’s more cost-effective for us because we don’t have as many people going
to the doctors. So there’s an economic imperative to do this as well.

It’s early. This data is always tough to grab, but we’re actually beginning to see data that says our population
is getting healthier and that’s reducing our medical costs. So there is a powerful public health issue here.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices