Interview with Corporate Director of Tiffany, Estée Lauder, Williams-Sonoma Rose Marie Bravo | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Corporate Director of Tiffany, Estée Lauder, Williams-Sonoma Rose Marie Bravo

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 16, 2022

16 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Rose Marie Bravo, Director on the boards of Tiffany, Estée Lauder and Williams-Sonoma discusses leveraging
the board, in-demand directors and non-executive chairmen.

PLAY VIDEO

An Edited Transcript

Chapter 1 - A CEO and her Board – leveraging the relationship to make better leaders.

Roger Crockett: How can the board help the CEO be successful, and how can the board help in the
development of high potential management?

Rose Marie Bravo: Well a board can be immensely valuable if a CEO and management team know how to use the board.
The board members are there to add value. And on the boards that I have been on and that I have
observed, there’s a great deal of expertise around the table on various subjects. So you have a variety
of expertise and it’s up to the CEO and the chairman to be the sort of band leader, and to figure out
how to utilize the best of the talents that they have around that table.

Roger Crockett: Okay. Well, give me a couple of examples. I know that on some of your boards you said there
had been programs and panels put in place. Talk a little bit about those.

Rose Marie Bravo: Most recently, I’ve been involved with Williams-Sonoma’s leadership team and they asked two or three
of the board members to meet with them to talk about our successes, and yes, our failures. We were
asked what are some of the things we learned as we were running companies? What are some of the
things we wanted to pass on to new leaders, and what we thought was important in a leader? We
have a wonderful program at Estée Lauder called Semper Novus and it means ‘Always New’. Leonard
Lauder, our Chairman Emeritus, believes that one executive must always be learning. Everything has
to always be new because the business we’re in is forever changing and is transformational. So his
mantra is, “How do we keep the executive team always learning and exploring the nuances of all the
various aspects of the business that one is involved in?” So he has a program that is run by Phoebe
Port, whereby they bring in executives from all around the world, and they invite board members to
attend just because they believe so much in leadership. I think it’s a wonderful program.

Chapter 2 - “Adding value as a director takes more time than it used to.”

Roger Crockett: Now that makes it obvious that the time commitment required from a board member is much
different today than it was maybe a few years ago. Talk a bit about how much time is required,
and why it’s changing in corporate America.

Rose Marie Bravo: I’ve seen the board meetings themselves really evolve, and they’ve stretched in most cases now to
almost two full days when you get done with the committees and the executive sessions. Some of it
is due to the good governance practices that we have to deal with. So time is needed to follow up on
some of the regulations to make sure that we are doing all the things we are supposed to be doing.
Then you have the actual business of the business. In a couple of these cases, Estée Lauder and
Williams-Sonoma, the companies own multiple brands. So even getting a board to be familiar with all the
different brands in terms of presentations, that takes up a lot more time.

At a company like Tiffany that is burgeoning in Asia and other places around the world, you have, all of a
sudden, international issues that maybe ten years ago didn’t exist. Now in almost every board meeting
you have a session on China, the importance of China as a market, the importance of the Chinese
consumer, the importance of the Chinese consumer who travels into duty free outlets, the importance of
Chinese consumers in Europe - whether shopping in Paris, shopping in London, or shopping in Berlin.
This has changed the whole complexity of learning for the board, to keep them up to speed. Now
we’re asking the board to add value on some of the experiences they might have with some of these
[international] markets. Also, technology has changed everything for us.

Roger Crockett: How so?

Rose Marie Bravo: So now you have e-commerce, now you have Pinterest, now you have Twitter meetings, Facebook
meetings, and you’re talking now about social media as another major topic, which if you go back even
five years, didn’t exist. So I think it’s more complex, it takes more time. And I find that the (board)
materials you get in advance, which maybe years ago came in a smaller books, now come in a big
stack, But of course, they are all on the iPad. You have material that has to be read. You have to take
time. If you have a question about the material, you have to take the time to inquire about that. Then
you have the board meeting itself. Then you have the post meeting because the meeting itself raises
questions and issues that you might want to think about, you might want to mull over, sleep over, and
think, ‘well maybe this was a good idea, maybe it wasn’t, but what do they mean by this?’ ‘I want to
call so-and-so to ask about this.’

Chapter 3 - On-the-job education for sitting CEOs

Roger Crockett: Rose Marie, why is it important for CEOs to be on an outside board?

Rose Marie Bravo: When I first became CEO of Burberry, I was asked to sit on the Tiffany board, and I thought to myself,
‘Oh, I am not going to want to do this, and my board isn’t going to let me do this because I am just
going to be too busy just having taken this new role.’ My very foresighted chairman said to me, “You
absolutely should do this. This is a wonderful opportunity. You will learn immensely and it will add value
to what you’re doing at Burberry.” He was so right. That was in 1997 and it helped me immensely
because I was able to almost have a front seat watching a company go international, watching a
company develop an e-commerce site from a catalogue business, watching how they developed their
licensee arrangements with various categories of product, arrangements with franchise partners in
places like the Middle East and Russia that were difficult to do business with on your own at that time.
So it gave me a window into a world as a new CEO. I felt like I was learning, and probably they were
giving me more value than I was giving them at that time. But it was a wonderful learning experience.

Chapter 4 - “Knowing when to zip it and when to weigh in.”

Roger Crockett: Well, talk about what it takes to be a good director, a good board member.

Rose Marie Bravo: You have to be interested in the business and in the company that you’re involved with. And I think in
short order you figure out where can you add value. You try to say, “How is my experience relevant to
that particular business, and given who else is there, where can I add value?” And I think being on a
board sometimes means knowing when to zip it and also knowing when you can contribute. You may
be the authority on a particular subject versus maybe other subjects where you have a point of view, but
you may not be as informed as somebody else.

I mentioned Estée Lauder and their incredible leadership program, and Fabrizio Freda’s mantra: He
calls it ‘Leading from every chair’. He’s come up with this little cheat sheet. He talks about things like
thinking strategically, engaging the team in the vision, embracing change, developing talent, energizing
others, building collaborative relationships, demonstrating agility, driving creativity and innovation, striving
for excellence and having high touch leadership competencies. I thought, ‘What a great little bible for a
board member’ because all of these are areas that we, as board members, are supposed to care about:
talent, strategy, vision, the plan and approving the plan, and of course, following good governance. But
beyond all of that, these are really things that are additive to a company management team if a board
member is really engaged in some of these very important points.

Chapter 5 - Take full advantage of the non-executive chairman.

Roger Crockett: You mentioned Estée Lauder. Estée Lauder has a person who is the CEO and another person
who is the non-executive chairman. That is becoming more of a trend, splitting those roles.
What is important about splitting or not splitting those roles?

Rose Marie Bravo: That was a very new concept to me when I became the CEO of Burberry because in the UK it is
mandatory to have a chairman and a CEO. They split the roles. All public companies have the split
role. Split roles was unheard of, in my experience, but I found it to be excellent for me. It worked for
me very well. I had two different chairmen during my nine-year tenure with Burberry, both of whom
were very different, who had very different skills. And both of whom were extremely additive to the value
equation at the company. I think it’s like any other thing a good CEO does. You think about how to
utilize the resources that are available to you. I always looked at, even though I was reporting to the
chairman, I always looked at the chairman as working for me. How can I use this chairman, this person
with so much expertise in fields and areas that I really may not be as knowledgeable about. In both
cases they were male, and I found that I developed this concept of delegating upwards, because there
were areas that I felt that, “Gosh, I don’t have time to do some of this other work.” It could be working
with the City. It could be reviewing investor relations conversations. My second chairman there was an
expert, John Peace, in dealing with the City because he had been a CEO of a FTSE 100 company. So
he knew the ins and outs of the City.

I figured out that my value added was more in the product and the merchandising and the marketing.
If I could spend my time doing that, and he helped me in an additive way, running the board, doing so
many other roles that he was able to do for me, I was going to be more effective. I think one of the
things you hit upon earlier, Roger, is how complex it is today to be a CEO. There isn’t a day that goes
by that there is not another article in the newspaper about a CEO wanting to get out, being thrown
out, staying too long, or adding different roles. Every day, it’s like the big topic. You ask yourself why
it’s become so much more complex than it was, say, five, ten, fifteen years ago. Having this dual role,
I think, is meaningful and especially if the personalities conjive. You mentioned Estée Lauder: with
William Lauder as chairman you had Fabrizio Freda as CEO. Their assets, their strengths very much
compensate for one another. They are able to go on to different subjects. I am now watching at
Williams-Sonoma Adrian Bellamy, who’s the chairman and Laura Alber who is the CEO. The learnings
for her include having a chairman who’s been a CEO of a global company and was a chairman of
Gucci group before that. This is a lot of experience and expertise that’s brought to the table. I think a
wise CEO can just take advantage of all that knowledge.

Chapter 6 - “CEOs in Retail today need to eat their Wheaties.”

Roger Crockett: The environment, for retail especially, has changed so dramatically over the years. How has that
affected the competencies needed for CEOs to manage well?

Rose Marie Bravo: I think CEOs in retail really have to take their Wheaties because you’re 24/7 now. The retail landscape
is so competitive. When I think back to when I was beginning my career in retail at Macy’s versus the
complexity of what you deal with now—from Amazon.com to Target to Saks Fifth Avenue to designer
boutiques—you’re getting competition from every part of the world. I think that has added complexity
to the business and to the landscape. Of course, a part of the whole e-commerce conversation in
those companies like Williams-Sonoma and Tiffany was that they had catalogue businesses. I think
it was easier for them to go into e-commerce than maybe somebody like Burberry that didn’t have a
catalogue business at that time. We didn’t even have mail order. We didn’t even have warehousing
for mail order and for catalogue. So people like Estée Lauder that had some catalogue business, they
were able then to transform that into e-commerce. Certainly Williams-Sonoma was a great example
of going very easily into e-commerce, and now direct-to-consumer represents a big part of their total
business. I think it added to the complexity of what a role of the CEO is in today’s world.

Roger Crockett: Does that necessarily mean, though, that the CEO must bring to the table experience in digital
media and social media, in technology? Or can they just have fundamental management skills?

Rose Marie Bravo: I think you need fundamental, good management skills first. And you need good leadership skills that
we talked about earlier. I think that you’re going to want expertise for sure in e-commerce and social
media, whether you get from your board, whether it’s from the head of marketing, or you actually
bring somebody on board as Williams-Sonoma has just done by bringing the head of marketing from
Google onto their board to get that technology know-how. There’s different ways around it. I think
to think that one CEO, one human being, is going to be able to possess everything that is necessary
to be a great retail CEO is a fallacy. I think it’s about building the team and having a strong CFO and
COO. In the case of the dual leadership roles, the chairman and splitting the roles of CEO, I come
from the merchant line, I come from the product line, so I think for a retail CEO not to have been
immersed in merchandising, product, stores, that’s hard. I am not saying it’s impossible, but I think
today you want somebody that knows your product because after all, nothing happens in retail until
a customer buys something. So you need to have some understanding of the product and what it’s
about, and how to drive that dream that you’re selling.

Chapter 7 - Required expertise, in the boardroom and the c-suite.

Roger Crockett: Well you mention the board - Is there a new profile for a good board or good Director?

Rose Marie Bravo: I think that a lot of the nominating committees that I sit on really spend a lot of time developing the
areas of expertise that one must have on the board. At Estée Lauder, one of the things they felt
passionately about, particularly the nominating committee and Lynn de Rothschild, was that we
needed to have Asian representation. She went very far to find Wei Christianson, who came on to the
board from China. She was living in Shanghai, and believe it or not, was able to make the commitment
of attending the board meetings. So that’s been invaluable. But it depends on the board. I mentioned
Williams-Sonoma. They absolutely wanted to have somebody come on from e-commerce. They felt
they needed social media and more understanding in e-commerce. So they have the Google person.

Tiffany just brought on Robert Singer who’s coming from many experiences, but he was the COO
and CFO of Gucci. That was a case where it was felt that we needed more luxury experience. I think
boards and probably nominating committees are spending a lot of time scrutinizing the backgrounds
of what they have, who may be getting close to retirement, who’s going to be going off the board,
and then what are the talents that we want to bring into the company. I think, at the top of everyone’s
list, of course, is international experience. People are craving that. Not just on boards, but even for
executive talent. Having lived elsewhere, having lived in another part of the country, having lived in
another part of the world, this is the big asset. I would say to young people who are in the process of
building their career, that if they get an opportunity to move, to relocate, to live in another part of the
world, even another part of the country, I would grab it. I would grab it because I think having that is a
very important asset to have in your bag of tricks.

Roger Crockett: Does that necessarily mean, though, that the CEO must bring to the table experience in digital
media and social media, in technology? Or can they just have fundamental management skills?

Rose Marie Bravo: I think you need fundamental, good management skills first. And you need good leadership skills that
we talked about earlier. I think that you’re going to want expertise for sure in e-commerce and social
media, whether you get from your board, whether it’s from the head of marketing, or you actually

Chapter 8 - Women, boards and good leadership.

Roger Crockett: Estée Lauder has done a tremendous job in terms of having a number of women on its board, but
other companies haven’t done as good as job. How do we get more women in leadership roles
in corporate America?

Rose Marie Bravo: I’m so glad you mentioned Estée Lauder. Of course, the company was founded by a woman, and
had women such as Carol Phillips, in probably almost half their brands actually running billions of
dollars worth of businesses individually as mini CEOs. I think they were always a company that sort
of understood it and from Leonard on down, I think you’ve had this feeling of supporting women. So
when it came to the board and when Leonard was taking the company public and creating a board,
he made sure this whole idea of balance on the board and diversity was present in every way. Today,
we have more women on the board than we do men. We employ women in more than 70% of the
staff around the world: Women running countries, women in legal counsel, women in HR, women
in communications. I think that the whole world is going this way, and understanding that there is
a connection between the products they are selling and who the end consumer is and what the
management of the company is and what the board reflects.

I do think that with this next generation we’re going to see a giant leap forward in terms of many
women, especially in our country, getting to that CEO corner office. It means making some sacrifices-
-and this is for males or females, anybody. A person has to realize that stepping into that next level, it
means they have to make sacrifices.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices