European talent trends in the age of impact investing | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

European Talent Trends In The Age Of Impact investing

Sustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSocial ImpactSustainability OfficersExecutive Search

Article

Sara Vermeir

June 17, 2021

6 min

Sustainable LeadershipLeadership StrategiesEnvironmental Social and GovernanceSocial ImpactSustainability OfficersExecutive Search

Executive Summary

Does your organization have the right leadership team to deliver your impact goals?

Close

Sara Vermeir

Brussels

The explosive demand in social investments and impact investing is creating a talent shortage in the industry. To help firms better understand how to hire and retain leaders, Russell Reynolds Associates set out to analyze the talent in the European impact investment landscape, having recently partnered with the European Venture Philanthropy Association (EVPA) to collect data on the profiles and insights of 60 European impact investment professionals.1

Our findings identified several trends common to most firms:

Diversity

The impact investing sector is more gender diverse than its private equity and venture capital peers (the models most comparable to the impact investing industry). It is also notable for its geographical diversity, as global expertise and awareness is highly valuable for the widespread nature of its work.

Growing sector

As a group, leaders’ tenures in impact investing are relatively short. The CEOs and managing partners of most firms do not have previous CEO experience and only 30% have a tenure of over 10 years, indicating that the sector is still relatively young and growing. This stands in contrast to the tenures of those running private equity and venture capital firms, which tend be much greater. This suggests that there are great opportunities for expansion, as focus on the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals accelerate. It also demonstrates how attractive the impact investing space is for “next generation” and emerging talent.

Versatile backgrounds

The majority of impact investment leaders have a hybrid of investment management and nonprofit backgrounds, and leaders from multiple backgrounds (not only nonprofit) are increasingly looking for opportunities where they can have positive impact. However, it should be noted that many private equity teams are also looking to add impact investing talent to their teams.

Challenges of retention and lack of HR processes

One of the biggest challenges that companies face is retaining their expert impact investment talent, particularly as larger investors look to expand their social impact investing activities. A lack of formal HR and impact measurement teams may contribute to this challenge. As this diverse and hybrid industry continues to expand, there will be more demand for talent; this may lead to a greater emphasis on incentives – both short and longer-term.

Profiles of European impact investing leaders

Senior executive profiles in the European impact investing industry is continuously evolving, and differentiated by a few characteristics:

Increase in gender diversity

Almost 30% of the leaders in European impact investing are female, compared to 10% in the private equity and venture capital industry.2  While there has been an increase in the female talent pool (compared to traditional asset management), companies still struggle to create a gender balanced workplace.

Regional and local market knowledge

More than a third of leaders have lived on two or more continents; 58% of firms that invest in two or more continents hire senior leaders with this profile.  As investments become more global, companies are evolving to recruit investors who are local to their investments.

Growing sector

As a group, most impact investment leaders have been in their roles less than 10 years. Just 30% have held their title for a decade or more; others are nearly evenly split with 22% holding their role for five to 10 years; 32% for one to five years; and 17% for less than one year. These short tenures are a sign that the sector is still young and growing.

Variety of professional experience

The majority of leaders previously led programs or departments or spent time as investment professionals at other organizations. The remaining were formerly CEOs or C-suite executives.

Career backgrounds of impact investing leaders

Overall, the majority of impact investing leaders come from a hybrid background (a mix of nonprofit and investment management experience), with an almost equal distribution across other background categories (financial industry, private sector and nonprofit/public sector career backgrounds).

Leaders from multiple backgrounds (not only nonprofit) are increasingly looking for opportunities where they can have positive impact, so there is a tendency to hire from the financial industry and other parts of the private sector.

Pros and cons of different backgrounds include:

Companies and team structure

While the majority of firms have a formal senior management team, few organizations have a formal HR team or officer. However, several firms have a dedicated impact measurement officer.

As the majority of firms lack HR expertise (either in the form of a team or dedicated individual), retention will require more attention.

Retention and development strategies

Developing and retaining “next gen” impact investing talent will be crucial as the focus on ESG and sustainable finance continue to increase, especially among large funds and investors. Most companies (74% of our survey respondents) use work-life balance as their main retention tool; other strategies include training, coaching and career progression opportunities.

While hard to implement, more than half of our survey respondents said there is a link between personal reward and measure of impact of the firm.

In fact, impact investors have a built-in retention advantage as a result of the personal fulfillment of the job. While this alone is not sufficient (i.e., firms will still have to monitor work/life balance and employ more traditional retention strategies like training and development), firms should be doing more to connect their enterprise impact with individual actions to drive employee engagement.

However, these strategies need to be implemented through formal arrangements and structures which, as mentioned above, many organizations still lack. Indeed, half of the firms that align rewards with achieving impact measures have an impact measurement officer or team.

Final recommendations

Professional HR management

Institute professional HR management teams with a strategic focus on talent acquisition, development and retention, as they will be crucial for impact investment firms to succeed. At present, while 77% of firms have dedicated senior management teams, only 17% have a dedicated HR leader.

Impact measurement team

Establish an impact measurement team to increase the opportunity and monitoring of links between personal reward and impact delivery and increase retention.

Focus on diversity

Consider screening for geographic diversity to ensure leaders understand market needs, where these are global.

Appendix: Methodology

RRA conducted a study in 2019 to analyze the profiles and backgrounds of senior leaders in global impact investing firms. Our study found that the scarcity of senior investment talent with a portable “track record” in impact investing will make it crucial for the sector to cultivate the next generation of impact investing leadership from both the nonprofit and investing worlds. We recently partnered with the EVPA to analyze trends specific to the European landscape.

Our data is based on the profiles and insights of 60 European impact investing leaders gathered from three main sources:

Survey

Together with the EVPA, we designed a survey to collect data on the backgrounds of European impact investing leaders and organizations. The target audience of the survey mainly included Impact Funds Initiative (IFI) members of the EVPA; this was extended to the wider EVPA membership. The total sample of survey respondents included 27 members from 27 different firms. The survey built on an earlier analysis launched by the EVPA, which had started to touch upon talent backgrounds.

Additional data gathering

RRA complemented the survey results with data collection from publicly available information and RRA’s proprietary data on 33 additional impact investing leaders.

Interviews

We conducted targeted interviews to gain deeper insights into trends in the sector. Interviewees included both EVPA IFI members who responded to the survey, and impact investing leaders from RRA’s network.

Additional Authors

Vanessa Di Matteo is a member of the Knowledge team for Russell Reynolds Associates' Social Impact sector. She is based in London.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices