Six COVID-era Leadership Imperatives | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Six COVID-Era Leadership Imperatives

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryOperations and Supply Chain OfficersDevelopment and Transition

Article

Dean Stamoulis

May 07, 2020

5 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryOperations and Supply Chain OfficersDevelopment and Transition

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The COVID-19 pandemic brought permanent change to some business models, including those that relied on just-in-time operations and thin supply chains.

Close

Dean Stamoulis

Atlanta

Few senior leaders have faced a challenge in their career as severe and potentially consequential as the Coronavirus pandemic and its global impact. Leaders who often rely on pattern recognition and past experience are finding that today’s issues have no historical comparison. This period is a truly novel test of their leadership ability – and no one has any idea how long it will last, or how it will end.

A lot is being written about how leaders should operate during the crisis, but relatively little has been written about the upcoming challenge of leading through the transition back – back to the office or factory, back to full productivity, back to an open economy, back to whatever comes after this period of social distancing and related efforts.

A Myriad of Challenges and Opportunities

As leaders work to get their businesses and workforces back up and running, they are faced with a myriad of challenges and opportunities: The health and economic impacts of the Coronavirus pandemic will be continuous, non-linear, global, and multivariate in nature.

01. Because of companies accepting bailouts or other forms of state support, governments will play an increasing role in corporations, impacting everything from compensation to customer engagement.

02. Even after society starts to rebuild, there will be generalized anxiety about the prospects of another seemingly unforeseeable crisis.

03. Organizations with strong balance sheets, excellent cost management, and effective cash flow will likely not only survive, but thrive. Weaker organizations and small businesses may fail.

04. Investments and acquisitions will eventually be at a bargain. Strong organizations will get stronger and larger. There will be changes in business ownership. Intellectual property will change hands. Private ownership in business may increase. All of this will accelerate in an effort to keep individual organizations solvent and operational.

05. Some business models will change completely, including those that rely solely on just-in-time operations, thin supply chains, and parts of our economy that will face long-lasting change, including retail and travel.

06. There will be questions around being global versus being local, and manufacturing of essential products will depend less on foreign partnerships that can easily fail during worldwide crises.

07. The crisis accelerates transformation efforts around digital and other fundamental transformations, and in some cases will be the catalyst for changes that leaders had long put off or pushed back against.

A Novel Virus Leads to Novel Leadership Challenges

In addition to the aforementioned societal, economic, and business model dynamics, leaders will have to take on new workforce engagement, safety and productivity challenges, among them:

01. Work might return to “normal” long before employee’s home lives do. Leaders will be focused on increasing productivity and performance, and expecting that employees are fully “here” when working. But the reality is that many workers are exhausted, dealing with lingering care issues (themselves or others) and will be trying to balance family and personal concerns at a level far above what was normal pre-pandemic.

02. After the last few months, it is quite likely that in many organizations, the leaders will no longer engender confidence in their workers. A company that was rated the Best Company to Work For furloughed 200,000 workers three weeks later. Leaders who said their employees were like family just laid people off. Well-paying jobs faced pay cuts. Leaders will need to rebuild trust in their workers, and show that they have learned from the experience.

03. Employees will need to switch from a mindset of “whatever it takes to survive” to one that is more focused on strategy and long-term goals. Survival in a crisis often involves taking customers wherever you can find them, but post the immediate crisis the company needs to return to its strategy.

04. As leaders look around, they may see competitors taking action that is more aggressive than they think prudent – frequent business travel, face-to-face meetings with clients, or similar. Leaders will feel pressure to not lose out to competitors, but must balance that with taking prudent measures to protect employees and the company. Offering long-term remote work arrangements may make employees feel safer, but comes at the risk of organizational culture disintegration.

05. For years, leaders have been able to use certain assumptions in their planning – that supply chains are available, manufacturing can take place, retail operates, small businesses and suppliers exist, etc. – that we have learned is not always true. Business models, financial plans, strategies are all based on a set of assumptions that now need to be reassessed and revised, potentially with dramatic impacts to the business.

The significant challenge to leaders in all of these situations is to figure out a path forward when most leaders have never experienced anything similar before.

What Matters Most

In normal times, the themes of organizational leadership, people leadership, and self-leadership are equally important. These are not normal times. While behaviors associated with organizational leadership – financial and operating “sharpness” and forced digital acceleration – have shifted into focus, behaviors associated with self-leadership have become the critical enablers of success. As executives focus on making fast decisions they cannot let their biases and other follies become critical de-railers in stressful situations. Moreover, the ability to move against short-term issues requires a level of employee engagement that goes above and beyond – empathetic and purpose-driven leadership will be loadbearing in the times to come.

During this challenging period, there are six core behaviors that leaders should focus on and look for in their leadership teams:

Bravery:

Executives need to be brave in thinking independently and making very difficult decisions. They know they are not bystanders to what is happening right now, but active participants. They need a sense of self-efficacy, or feeling of agency, with a mindset that they can act and make decisions that will improve outcomes. With these in place, they will need to be resilient, and able to withstand and work through the problems they face, and the resulting public scrutiny around their decisions.

Authenticity and empathy:

Executives must display authenticity and empathy in all that they do, and be a context-sensing communicator who is close to “perfect pitch” in their communications with different audience and in varying situations. In challenging times, the ability to show openness and vulnerability is critical for a leader to build rapport with others.

Purpose-driven:

Leaders must be able to connect the organization to societal purpose and explain the “reason for being” for the organization. This source of belonging, engagement, and motivation are very important overall, but especially critical while emerging from a period of crisis. Executive must be able to create a shared narrative to guide and galvanize people around strategy.

Offensive and defensive agility:

Executives need to think differently about the opportunities and challenges they are facing. They need to know how and when to deploy both an “offensive” and “defensive” mindset, and the approach issues systematically and while thinking across multiple horizons. What are the impacts now and in the future to the decisions we make today? They get there by being inclusive in how they create and harvest disparate perspectives, and they execute cleanly by managing the pace of their teams, their decision cycles, and their operations.

Financial and operating "sharpness":

Executives need a strong level of financial and operating “sharpness” to navigate the inevitable financial and economic challenges the organization will face. As part of this, executives need to develop a strategy that is grounded in a strong understanding of operations and what is possible to achieve given resources and circumstances.

Forced digital acceleration:

Executives must embrace digital tools and practices now, even if they were hesitant about them before. From innovation to remote work, digital is now critical to leader’s goals, but they must also be wide-eyed about the associated challenges and threats that come from a reliance on technology.

Additional Authors

PJ Neal leads the Center for Leadership Insight at Russell Reynolds Associates. He is based in Boston.

Six COVID-Era Leadership Imperatives

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices