CPG Organizations Seek Consumer-Centricity in 2020 | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

CPG Organizations Seek Consumer-Centricity in 2020

CPG Organizations Seek Consumer-Centricity in 2020

Industry TrendsLeadershipCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerCustomer Activation and GrowthExecutive Search

Article

March 09, 2020

7 min

Industry TrendsLeadershipCustomer Activation and GrowthConsumerCustomer Activation and GrowthExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

CPG organizations are confident in their ability to meet consumer demand and have placed their bets in three categories.

Close

"By capturing & analyzing more granular consumer-level data, we can... customize communication & executive in every store with precisely the right products in the right location at the right price."
- Hugh Johnston, Vice Chair & CFO, PepsiCo

Today’s consumers are more in control of the purchase funnel than ever before, which has forced organizations to rethink everything they do. CPG companies continue to work toward more agile & adaptive decision-making across the enterprise in order to keep up with everchanging consumer demands.

The overarching theme across all the presentations at CAGNY (Consumer Analyst Group of New York) 2020 was the goal of becoming more consumer-centric. As CEOs, CFOs and other executives reviewed company performance in 2019 as well as shared an outlook for 2020, consumer-centricity was at the center of every presentation.

Customer activation

In order to meet the demands of consumers, traditional customer relationships for both brands & manufacturers must evolve. Co-creation or co-manufacturing partnerships offer increased value for customers, such as established, private-label brands seeking to improve product/category innovation and increase speed-to-market.

“The consumer revolution is driving customer transformation…as customers are looking for a new kind of supplier or ‘co-creation partner,” William Lynch, Head of Investor Relations, Kerry Group.

Insight collaboration is paramount as brands must work more closely with their retail customers in terms of marketing and data, by sharing insights that ultimately drive sales. These brands must also master secondary search activation across 3rd-party eCommerce platforms and search engines.

Local execution is key as well. Restructuring its business helped PepsiCo become more locally focused, by “tailoring & optimizing resources to better capture the differing consumer needs in different continents.”1 Several companies have taken this hybrid approach in order to enable growth opportunities by getting closer to their consumers and deploying global capabilities to win locally.

Talent implications

The changing landscape of retail means that local activation is critical, the concept of a centralized customer team is now outdated. Instead, CPG companies must operate hybrid models. For relationships to evolve, leadership must be more strategic & innovative, with a willingness to experiment & take risks. They must be highly data-driven, providing insights that improve effectiveness & autonomy within local markets.

Product innovation

CPG organizations are confident in their ability to meet consumer demands with forthcoming product innovations. Companies have placed their bets in three categories: product-premiumization, alternative proteins and technology-enabled solutions.

Premium Products, which command higher price points, are proliferating across categories. General Mills’ has launched a $13 box of cereal, a category that has been in long-term decline is finally starting to stabilize and General Mills’ is doubling down on high margin product to take advantage of this. In the last few years, Colgate has extended its toothpaste offerings from “better and best” to “good, better and best” and widened the pricing margin between each from $1 to $2 more per tube.

Alternative proteins captured most of the spotlight, as plant- & nut-based products were highlighted by almost every company. “Plant-based alternatives for protein only capture a small percentage of the market opportunity. Just 17% of consumers have used meat substitutes while 69% are receptive to trying plant-based protein alternatives,” explained Dean Banks, President, Tyson Foods. Protein alternatives are a critical part of food & beverage company portfolios and are only in their infancy.

Talent implications

Leadership must transform R&D processes to create a digital-first R&D organization and innovation capability, using new technologies & platforms to dramatically simplify and speed up development. They must also be highly commercial, bringing consumer feedback directly into the R&D process by utilizing data, modeling and simulations to enable entirely new streams of innovation & revenue.

"Our focus remains on executing our strategies of superiority, productivity, constructive disruption and improving P&G´s organization & culture to deliver balanced top-line & bottom-line growth"
- David Taylor, President & CEO, Procter & Gamble

Technology enablement

Procter & Gamble’s CEO, David Taylor, highlighted the company’s focus on “superiority, productivity (and) constructive disruption” as they seek to utilize technology across the value chain.

This begins with building new manufacturing & automation centers that bring together artificial intelligence/machine learning, robotics, and other emerging technologies, which foster more consumer-led innovation and enhance product speed-to-market. Some brands—such as Tyson, McCormick and J.M. Smucker—are using blockchain technology to track products throughout the supply chain, in order to provide consumers/suppliers with a view into product source & quality.

Technology enablement continues across channels, particularly through eCommerce. This requires data-driven marketing and channel strategies, as well as having robust systems in place to properly mine incoming data, in order to create differentiated consumer experiences.

Lastly, consumer products themselves have become increasingly tech-enabled. Many brands have integrated cutting-edge technology into new products—i.e. Colgate-Palmolive and P&G introducing toothbrushes that scan the inside of your mouth to provide personalized insights into healthier teeth.

Talent implications

Technology & commercial teams must be connected and aligned throughout the organization. Top digital & technology leaders must posses consumer-centric DNA, with the ability to simplify complexity, apply analytics to commercial performance and deeply understand consumer behavior across platforms. Commercial leadership should be highly data-driven and bring a strong understanding & advocacy for technology enablement. Structurally, the product & digital teams must sit at the intersection of back-end technology and go-to-market functions.

Sustainability

Beyond purpose-led, environmentally friendly products & operations, brands emphasized the need to integrate sustainability into the enterprise strategy. Sustainability must be fully aligned with commercial ambitions and support the business by increasing brand & societal value. CAGNY presenters shared their organizations’ current & future ESG commitments, with robust targets around sustainable ingredients, environmental impact and mindful consumption. For example, many pledged, within the next 5-10 years, to have 100% of packaging be recyclable and 100% of ingredients be sustainably sourced as well as to reduce GHG emissions and water use by large proportions.

Unilever is leading the pack in terms of one, integrated strategy. Graeme Pitkethly, their CFO, reemphasized their “purpose is to make sustainable living commonplace, as people with purpose thrive, brands with purpose grow and companies with purpose last.” CPG companies must be fully transparent, as consumers care about how a product gets made as much as the product itself, as well as authentic by giving brands a voice and driving positive change.

Talent implications

At the highest level, this involves appointing a chief sustainability officer to demonstrate an enterprise commitment to advancing sustainability initiatives as well as establishing an ESG committee within the board of directors. Throughout the entire organization, this requires a cultural emphasis on sustainability and transformational business leaders who look beyond near-term profits and embrace their role as change agents. Effective sustainable leaders possess both the mindset of identify sustainability opportunity & risk and the skillset to address & seize it.

People & culture

Keeping up with a diverse & agile consumer base requires a diverse & agile workforce. To enable this, many CPG companies have made recent structural changes focusing on delayering the organization, removing silos across functions & business units and more localized execution. The reporting changes made sought to create simpler & faster organizations in which employees are more accountable to contribute beyond function/category.

Every brand wants to be more consumer-centric, but to do so, many are focusing on promoting a culture of consumer intimacy, collaboration, faster execution, empowerment and diversity & inclusion. To fully enable a more dynamic workforce, companies are heavily focusing on their culture. Despite this being a key message throughout CAGNY, the present leadership of the 30 companies significantly lacked diversity.

Talent implications

To truly promote diversity & inclusion, boards and executive teams must reflect the increasing diversity of their consumer base. Regarding organizational structure, there is no one size fits all; however, a hybrid model provides a strong balance of local capabilities with global support. The right structure, coupled with leadership who act as culture carries will allow for a more agile, collaborative working environment.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices