Interview with Chief Operating Officer of BNP Paribas Francois Villeroy de Galhau | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Chief Operating Officer of BNP Paribas Francois Villeroy de Galhau

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 15, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Francois Villeroy de Galhau on leading digital innovation in response to the needs and wants of today's customer.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

CHAPTER 1: Embracing Digital

Rhys Grossman: Mr Villeroy de Galhou, thank you very much for joining us. We’re here to talk about
digital transformation and how the topic of digital is affecting BNP Paribas. Perhaps I could start by
asking, in our research, three quarters of companies that we have spoken to have cited competitive
pressure as a reason for embracing digital. Why did BNP Paribas feel it needed to make digital
transformation a priority?

Francois Villeroy de Galhou: For us the main reason was not competitive pressure, to be honest,
because competition is not that huge at present. It was the fact that our customers are changing, very
simply, and they have different behaviours. To make a long story short, we were probably one of the
first European banks to introduce, around 12 or 13 years ago, the so called multi channel model. It
means that you still have a banking branch, but you can use the internet, the phones, the mobile and
so on. Digital banking is a completely different story. It’s the idea that some of our customers, the
youngest ones beginning with, don’t need a branch. And they say, we want only an online bank, and
let us be clear, a mobile bank, on our smart phones or on our tablets. Very simple. We don’t need a
dedicated advisor, we don’t need your broad spectrum of products and services, and we don’t want
your prices. It was, for us, a tough strategic decision, because we have a very powerful network of
branches throughout different European countries, and we want to keep our customers in this multi
channel model. But we decided to open a second bank within the bank, called Hello Bank, to be a
pure player. But our main idea was to attract new customers, to win market shares, but the strategic
channel was to create a second bank within the bank without being a face to face competitor of the
first bank.

CHAPTER 2: Innovation that supports the brand

Rhys Grossman: You yourself have a track record of embracing innovation and welcoming change.
In your view, does the establishment of Hello Bank represent a more fundamental shift in digital
transformation of the overall BNP Paribas, beyond creating a standalone business unit?

Francois Villeroy de Galhou: Unclear 00:02:49] strangely. It’s an interesting story from a cultural and
managerial point of view. Everybody in BNP Paribas is very proud to be a member of the European
work, able to launch such a powerful innovation in four different European countries. So this is a
reward we didn’t expect, to be honest. We expected a strong image, a strong direct image of Hello
Bank, but we got also an indirect benefit for the BNP Paribas brand. But it’s just the beginning, so we
have also to succeed with Hello Bank in reality.

CHAPTER 3: Managing a Digital Bank

Rhys Grossman: And do you think managing a digital bank will need the same skill sets as a
traditional one, or different ones...are you looking for a new type of leader?

Francois Villeroy de Galhou: This is a very important question. Obviously, managing a digital bank,
you are still a banker so you need any skills that a normal banker could have. So commercial skills,
risk skills, but you need more than that. You need a very strong market in feeling. We clearly think
that the decisive difference is customers’ experience. And we hire new people, very young ones, from
different countries, who are not classical IT guys for instance. But they bring design in the apps, it must
be very simple, it must be fun, it must be unique. And all the echoes we get from the first customers
of Hello Bank in France, Belgium or elsewhere, are very positive about customers’ experience. So this
is typically a skill which is used for a normal banker, but which is absolutely necessary and core for a
digital banker. At the end you need to be a good leader, we all know that. A natural quality of a leader
who can choose a star and bring his own team to such an exciting adventure.

Rhys Grossman: Let’s talk about how you’re doing this. How has BNP Paribas incorporated this new
type of leader into the board and into the C suite?

Francois Villeroy de Galhou: I had the opportunity in, at least once a year, in the last three years, to
go to the board and to present the main challenges we had in retail banking. I always mentioned the
digital challenge, and I was impressed by the fact that in each opportunity all the other channels went
very quickly, five minutes. But the board wanted to take more than half an hour about this issue of
digital banking, because it’s fascinating, even for people on the board who are not especially focused
on digital, but they know it’s our future. But the most important thing, we will not ask members of the
board, or CEO of the group, or the Chairman of the group, who are very dedicated on the project,
to become digital natives. It would be completely wrong and artificial. The most important thing,
including for me, is to be very sensitive and open and supporting, the fact that this innovation will
not bring money in the next year, let’s be honest, it’s investment. But it’s our future. And we in BNP
Paribas were lucky enough to have our Chairman, Jean-Laurent Bonnafé, our CEO, myself, and others,
a leading team completely convinced that it is our future.

CHAPTER 4: Embedding Digital Expertise Throughout the Organizations

Rhys Grossman: And how has digital affected succession planning, so that you have a pipeline of
digital talent for key roles?

Francois Villeroy de Galhou: You have the different generations. So if I take the people who are more
than 50s, for instance, like myself unfortunately, it’s very important to be open-minded, as I say. If I
take leaders of our management teams, at present, Béatrice Cossa Dumurgier, for instance, who is my
COO in retail banking. She is a digital native, to say it. She is very committed with the various Hello
teams we have in the countries, where the age average is probably between 30 and 35 years. So the
people who are in the teams belong to this generation, but it’s not enough, and we have to prepare
in the succession planning, with people who are coming from different countries and of a different
generation. So most important message we learned, is that it’s possible, inside a powerful group like
BNP Paribas, to have people like corporate entrepreneurs. We have a start up within an established
group. They need our support, but they also need autonomy. They need different ways of working
with IT innovations and so on, and this belongs to cultural change. It’s not yet completely won, but I’m
quite confident we made a long way in this direction.

CHAPTER 5: Importance of Culture to Drive Digital Change

Rhys Grossman: Lets talk about that. In your view, how significant is the cultural element that
needs to be addressed, both at the board and throughout the organisation, in order to make a digital
transformation work?

Francois Villeroy de Galhou: This is probably the most important point. We launched, to be honest,
two initiatives in the same year. The first one is digital bank, Hello Bank. We spoke about it for our
customers. And the second one, we call it digital working for our staff. We are a bank, so we are
a serious institution, and we need to be serious in our risk policy, in our compliance and so on. But
we want also to change the bank in working together in a much more collaborative way, in using all
the modern devices, in developing solution networks, and so on. And for us, it was a very strong
accelerator to say that in the same mood, we have digital bank and digital working. Changing cultures
will take months, years, so I don’t have yet a definitive answer to your question. The only point I
can make is that examplaratory is one of the strongest accelerators of change. If everybody in BNP
Paribas...we have 190,000 people across the world...if everybody sees the Chairman, the CEO, the
COO, the [unclear 00:10:03] members, the top managers, developing the digital work, welcoming
digital work, promoting innovation. Even if it has risks for our existing activities, even if it requires
changing a bit, then BNP Paribas will change quicker. We are the bank for a changing world. So the
world and our customers are changing at a dramatic pace, we know it. We have to change in a still
more dramatic pace. When you think you are at the end of innovation and digitalisation and so on,
you are in a very dangerous situation. We have still many progresses to deliver, but we think we will do
them.

Rhys Grossman: Mr Villeroy de Galhou, thank you very much

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices