Avoiding Leadership Integration Missteps | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Avoiding Leadership Integration Missteps

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipMergers & AcquisitionsAssessment and BenchmarkingC-Suite Succession

Article

Erin Zolna, Ph.D.

November 09, 2020

4 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipMergers & AcquisitionsAssessment and BenchmarkingC-Suite Succession

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Make leadership a priority during your due diligence process to pinpoint the executives who can steer the company through the integration.

Close

Erin Zolna, Ph.D.

New York

Leading an organization through a merger is on par with playing chess—one bad move, and you and the organization are on its backfoot playing defense. It is therefore critical to stay one step ahead and in control, as the individuals tasked with leading a merged entity can have an outsized impact on success. In fact, a study conducted by law firm Baker McKenzie demonstrates that 44% of mergers fail due to poor leadership around the integration.

The good news? An intentional approach can ensure you avoid missteps and have the right executive talent in place on day one. As playwright Moliere once said, “It is not only what we do, but also what we do not do, for which we are accountable.” This is certainly true when it comes to mergers. Below are six areas of accountability to consider when building the new company’s (NewCo) executive team.

01. Build your executive talent bench for today’s challenges and tomorrow’s opportunities

A cohesive integration requires a commitment to rigorous self-examination, great timing, and exceptional leaders. Make leadership a priority during your diligence process to pinpoint the executives who can steer the company through the integration. But selecting the leaders based solely on the integration needs may mean risking the organization’s longer-term success at the expense of a successful integration. To mitigate this risk, identify leaders who are not only exceptional at navigating through change and ambiguity but who also have the potential to drive new areas of growth and development for the business’ longer-term needs. By keeping an eye on the succession implications of bringing in NewCo executive talent, organizations will ensure they have the executive talent they need for today while accelerating the growth of tomorrow.

02. Assess with a fresh lens

Do not assume the current executive teams from either legacy organization are the teams you will need for the new entity. Leaving this unaddressed is one of the top reasons that integrations fall short, so it is important to define the type of leadership the organization will require. This could mean orienting towards finding exceptional operational leadership, the “talent magnets” that inspire followership, or innovative thinkers who will disrupt each legacy organization’s products and services. Once these requirements are defined, this becomes the criteria against which you should begin assessing talent. Ideally, this should be done in partnership with a third party who can provide talent benchmarks and objective assessments to ensure the selection process is fair and unbiased. This objective third-party view, along with having select board members tasked with providing feedback on selection decisions, is of paramount importance.

03. Define clear roles

A lack of clear roles can significantly slow down the leadership integration process. After all, how can stakeholders make decisions if they do not know who is responsible for interviewing and selecting candidates?

To help your team get on the same page, clarify decision-making rights upfront and establish the role of the board, CEO, HR, and the third-party partner. Who will be responsible for recommendations vs. providing input? It is important to make sure that the interview and selection process is the same for all candidates. Implementing these boundaries will take the guesswork out of candidate selection and determine who is responsible for signing off on each hire. The result: more precise executive hires in a shorter span of time.

04. Communicate, communicate, communicate

In times of uncertainty, under-communicating can be a pitfall. An end-to-end communication plan is a great way to combat this. It can provide transparency into the selection process and clarify the ins and outs of talent selection.

Develop your communication plan early and revisit it often. Be sure to convey how hiring decisions are made and what is being done to ensure equity and objectivity. Most of all, be prepared to reiterate these messages and have them reflect your overarching vision. Messages often need to be shared in multiple forums, multiple times in order to be heard. Executives require a high-touch communication strategy that feels bespoke to them but is rigorous and well-planned.

05. Understand and manage the risks

Failure to successfully transition into an executive role can significantly impact the integration’s success, including missing critical integration KPIs, diminished board confidence in the CEO’s leadership, and low employee morale. These risks are heightened by staggering transition failure rates. In fact, 40% of senior executives fail within the first 18 months of starting a new position and 87% of HR professionals rate leadership transitions as one of the most difficult processes leaders face in their careers. Transitions are also ranked second only to a divorce in terms of human experiences which create the most stress and anxiety. To combat this, ensure clear transition plans are in place to set up executives for success in their new, complex, larger, and more demanding roles. This can include providing clarity on their new stakeholder environment, being clear about their strategic priorities, and ensuring the teams underneath them include exceptional performers.

A lack of focus on inclusion can also present significant challenges for the organization. These challenges can include a failure to create a culture where differing opinions are welcome, or simply having an executive team that lacks a diversity of talent. These risks should be mitigated by emphasizing inclusion in the NewCo business strategy, prioritizing the development of talent, setting enterprise-wide inclusion targets, and ensuring that diverse talent from both legacy organizations is effectively retained.

6. Prioritize candidate care

Identifying the best talent is only half the battle. The key to building the right executive teams is recruiting and retaining top talent. This is where a white-glove experience can make a big difference. It is easy to forget that an integration selection process, which often includes choosing between two executives for one role, is actually an executive recruitment exercise. Leaders need to understand the NewCo vision, aspirational culture of the CEO, and opportunities for him/her going forward within the current and future roles.

Focus on “re-recruiting” current executives through a personalized approach that takes their skills and experience into account. This should include highlighting their long-term succession potential within the organization and their ability to shape its success.

Ensuring that there is a rigorous process in place to test the key areas of accountability can make a significant difference in the success of a merger. Combine strong tactics with relevant data points to identify gaps and find the best talent. Above all, do not overlook the importance of assessing your needs — it will allow you to move into the next phase of growth with an executive team ready to deliver short- and long-term goals.

Additional Authors

Eric Wimpfheimer leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership & Succession practice Knowledge team. He is based in New York.

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices