But Have They Ever Worked in PE Before? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

But Have They Ever Worked in PE Before?

Industry TrendsPortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinance OfficersExecutive Search

Article

November 02, 2020

3 min

Industry TrendsPortfolio Company LeadershipPrivate CapitalFinance OfficersExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Private equity-backed companies traditionally look externally to hire CFOs, generating mixed results.

Close

The old CFO hiring playbook is holding you back

The critical role of the chief financial officer (CFO) in a PE-backed business is well-documented. As the financial steward, data custodian and primary liaison with the sponsors, there is very little margin for error. Despite this outsized importance and the frequency with which PE investors hire CFOs across their portfolios, there remains significant uncertainty around which characteristics and core competencies to look for in candidates. As a result, sponsors tend to value a safe pair of hands, recycling the same candidates instead of searching for creative solutions.

To better understand CFO hiring trends across the European PE landscape, Russell Reynolds Associates mapped the CFOs of almost 3,000 portfolio companies across all sectors and countries. We analysed a representative subset of 150 of these companies, using sponsors’ fund sizes as a proxy for company scale.

Turnover is rapid. Only the fittest survive.

There is a war for established CFO talent; prior exposure to private equity environments is becoming increasingly sought-after, and this will likely reduce the talent pool.

Diversity is at the forefront of the hiring agenda, and although progress has been made over the years, there is plenty more to do.

01. Why are you ignoring internal talent?

It is a well-known fact that the CFO is the most frequently upgraded function following a buyout, with sixty percent of companies in our dataset having replaced their CFO post-acquisition. Where a new CFO was hired, the successful candidate was overwhelmingly likely to be externally hired, with promotion prospects for internal candidates slim at just seven percent. Promoting the number two to the CFO role can lead to a quicker transition and smoother onboarding if the bench is strong enough. Identifying and nurturing high-potential internal talent should be at the front of your mind from day one.

When are CFOs replaced?

Of this 60%

Where are CFOs hired from?

02. Why aren’t your CFOs more diverse?

On average, 14 percent of portfolio company CFOs are female, slightly trailing both the FTSE 350 and the Euro Stoxx 50, each at 17 percent. There is significant variation across fund sizes, with smaller funds having made greater strides towards more female representation.

Female CFOs by fund size

Female CFOs by hiring date

03. What trade-offs are you willing to make?

PE investors love to hire CFOs who have already done the job, thereby limiting their talent pool and denying their portfolio companies innovative next-generation talent.

While businesses owned by funds in the €1-4.99bn range are 14 percentage points more likely to hire a step-up CFO than larger portfolio companies, two-thirds of current CFOs have served as a CFO before. Integrating psychometric assessments and leadership coaching into the hiring process can mitigate the risk of hiring an unproven candidate. Psychometrics also allow for a wider net to be cast, leading to a more diverse talent pool.

Given the relative dearth of female CFO talent, it is interesting to note that almost 50 percent of female CFOs were step-up candidates compared to just 30 percent of male candidates. Similarly, female CFOs were 20 percentage points more likely than male CFOs to be hired from outside of sector, highlighting the trade-offs that investors will make to bring in more diverse talent.

Step up experience by fund size

Step up experience by gender

Sector experience by fund size

Sector experience by gender

04. Is experience really better than potential?

“But have they ever worked in PE before?” is the most common question when screening CFO candidates. PE is one of the most challenging environments in which a CFO can operate, and proven comfort with high leverage, frequent reporting, and working capital pressures is seen as crucial.

Contrary to conventional wisdom, most portfolio company CFOs have never held a PE-backed CFO role before, and this is especially true for portfolio companies of funds in the €1-4.99bn range.

Similarly, the CFOs of smaller portfolio companies are 14 percentage points less likely to have led a business through an exit than those at the helm of large-cap portfolio companies.

The PE market was extremely buoyant between 2018 and 2020 but funds have recently fallen back on old habits, increasingly hiring based on experience rather than potential.

Prior PE CFO experience

Prior PE exit experience

Prior PE experience by joining date

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices