Interview with Former Chairman of Citigroup Dick Parsons | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Former Chairman of Citigroup Dick Parsons

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 16, 2022

6 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Citigroup’s chairman reflects on board composition, the role of the board in addressing issues such as
risk oversight, heightened regulatory requirements, the rise of shareholder activism, and the ultimate board
responsibility—CEO succession.

PLAY VIDEO

An Edited Transcript

Roger Crockett: Let’s start at a fundamental level. What is the role of the board when it relates to risk? Is it
risk oversight? Is it risk management? What is your view?

Dick Parsons: In truth, the board’s role is, by definition, relegated to oversight: oversight as to the framework
within which decisions get made. and then are decisions being made after the fact, within
that framework, and is that framework in need of adjustment and modification? You know it’s
interesting—at Citi we sometimes get into discussions with our regulators, and sometimes even
with shareholders, about whether the board is managing this or is the board managing that?.
Well, [the answer is] boards don’t manage. That’s the reality. Boards don’t manage and can’t
manage. Their responsibility isn’t to be managers.

Roger Crockett: That’s the responsibility of the management team, the executive leadership team …

Dick Parsons: That’s exactly right. [The board’s] responsibility is to make sure that you’ve got the right
managers on the field and to make sure those managers have a framework within which to carry
out their management responsibilities that’s sensible and appropriate to the circumstances and
then to make sure, on a monitoring basis, that, in fact, those policy decisions, which I’m calling
framework, are being observed.

Roger Crockett: So let’s talk about how a board appoints different people to different committees on its
board and whether you develop a Risk Committee or have a qualified risk expert. How do
you go about appointing directors to different roles?

Dick Parsons: I will give you some real life examples from Citi. Until about a year ago, we had one committee
that was [called] the Audit and Risk Committee. A little more than a year ago we decided as a
group that we were going to separate those [responsibilities] into two committees because the
Audit Committee really looks after the financial reporting and controls. And risk, particularly in a
bank, is a different thing. And so this [combined] committee had such an overwhelming agenda
we thought it would be best to break it in two: Have the Audit Committee do the financially
oriented function and the Risk Committee focus on what we’ve been talking about—setting the
framework for risk management and then overseeing risk management as it was implemented
by the [executive] management team. Those who have an interest in risk management and,
particularly from my perspective as the chairman, those who have a background in financial
risk management lend themselves to be on the Risk Management Committee. And those with
stronger interests and experience on the financial and control side lend themselves to be on the
Audit Committee.

Roger Crockett: Well not long ago, the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] stepped in to sort
of change up the rules. They implemented this proxy access rule requiring companies to
include the nominees of large shareholders [among the slate of candidates to be voted on
for slots on the board of directors]. What is your feeling about that? How does that change
what you’ve done on your board, and how should other boards go about addressing the
environment with new rules in place like this?

Dick Parsons: I’m not sure it’s changed anything yet because this applies respectively to the upcoming proxy’s
right. So that we haven’t seen these new rules in effect and in play yet. To be candid, I have my
doubts about the efficacy of all of this. Boards are supposed to be consistent around at least one
thing, which is we are all here for the benefit of all the shareholders. I think when you open up the
possibility of having special groups of large shareholders potentially putting on their own directors,
[those directors] might be beholden to that group of shareholders and not the others. There are
lots of unintended consequences that could ensue that will make it much more difficult to both
manage and grow businesses for the interest of all the shareholders as opposed to a subgroup of
them. But we’re just going to see how it works out, you know?. The SEC obviously had a different
view than I would take, but theirs may be wiser.

Roger Crockett: You’re not sure you want all the shareholder input?

Dick Parsons: No, no, no, it’s not a question of not wanting shareholder input because I don’t have a problem
with that. What I have a problem with is having special constituencies within a board that is
supposedly going in a direction for the good of the whole as opposed to the good of some
substantial but nonetheless minority view.

Roger Crockett: We work in a global environment these days. So it’s not just the SEC rules or this U.S.
environment that’s important, but it’s also the landscape in Europe and Asia and Latin
America and other places where different regulatory bodies oversee global companies.
What factors do you see that are relevant to consider beyond the U.S.?

Dick Parsons: There’s a huge focus, a huge focus on what is happening in economies and regions and
countries, even in cities, around the globe and how can we play in those spaces and play
effectively. Who is your borrower? Who is your customer? What economic environment is he or
she or it functioning in? What are its prospects? All of those things you have to know in order to
make a prudent investment decision and to manage risk prudently. So it’s all about information
and it’s all about understanding on a global basis kind of what bets you’re making and how
prudent they are. We’ve got a guy [on the Citi board] named Alain Belda who is a Brazilian, and,
although he ran Alcoa for awhile, he’s now back in Brazil. He’s a partner in Warburg Pincus,
and he’s really plugged into the local scene down there. Bottom line, it’s very important to have
a sense of what’s going on around the world because that gives you some more information in
terms of evaluating the levels of risk you’re exposing yourselves to.

Roger Crockett: Well, Dick, let’s turn to perhaps the most important question when it comes to the board’s
responsibility—and that is succession.

Dick Parsons: Succession is important, and it’s always in play because you have two circumstances in which
it can arise. One is the unexpected. People do get hit by buses or sometimes things develop in
the marketplace that force you to make a move that you hadn’t anticipated. And then there’s
the longer term [succession plan]. We proceed down both paths. We have what we call an
emergency or unanticipated development plan: What happens if somebody gets hit by a bus,
comes down with an illness or, for other personal reasons, has to leave? What do we do in
those circumstances to make sure that the entity can continue to function, that all the bases are
covered, that there is the right chain of command and leadership in place? And then you embark
on a longer and more thoughtful process, usually [regarding] the CEO in terms of identifying both
within and outside the organization those who have the potential for future leadership. What kinds
of experiences should they be exposed to on the way? What’s the time frame for getting them up
to speed? And gradually, over time, you begin to focus on a small group who would be the likely
successors when the current CEO is ready to roll.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices