Supply Chain Evolution in the Midst of Global Disruption | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Supply Chain Evolution in the Midst of Global Disruption

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationOperations and Supply Chain OfficersDevelopment and TransitionAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

April 21, 2020

4 min

Leadership StrategiesTransformation and InnovationOperations and Supply Chain OfficersDevelopment and TransitionAssessment and Benchmarking

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The adoption and importance of digital systems that provide visibility along the entire supply chain will only increase.

Close

Ben Shrewsbury

Dallas

Euan Kenworthy

Singapore

Emerging Supply Chain Trends and the Leadership Implications

In the midst of crisis and global business disruption, the only constant is change. As the operating models of businesses are tested by the events of the recent crisis and others to come, supply chains around the globe will evolve to keep pace. As supply chains evolve, critical supply chain leadership needs will also change. Organizations that proactively embrace that change and what it means for their leadership team will be better positioned for future competitiveness.

Here are some emerging supply chain trends and the resulting leadership implications for organizations to consider.

“Speed” and “Cost to Serve” remain important, but supply chain “Flexibility” and “Resilience” are critical differentiators

Emerging supply chain trends

Multi-nodal manufacturing and near-shoring to developed markets where the business case can be made for capital investment compared to labor costs is likely to accelerate

Global supply chains with a focus on redundant capacity and appropriate inventory management will prove most capable in the face of disruption

Leadership implications

“Agility” as a core leadership competency is paramount

Leaders with an understanding of multiple geographic markets/cultures and diverse operating experiences will prove most capable

The adoption and importance of digital systems that provide visibility along the entire supply chain will only increase.

Emerging supply chain trends

Enterprise technology that supports the track and trace of value chain inputs and enables enhanced demand & supply planning (enterprise S&OP) will become much more commonplace

Beyond primary value chains, visibility into multiple tiers of the supply base will help ensure adequate supply and improved working capital, not to mention risk management

Leadership implications

Familiarity with data-driven analytics, customized dashboards, value-added pattern analysis and high-quality reporting are important

The technology-enabled leader who has deployed and operated enterprise platforms to enable demand & supply visibility is a differentiator

Risk management capabilities and actionable operating plans in the face of supply chain disruption are essential.

Emerging supply chain trends

Off-the-shelf, scenario-based risk management plans that seek to minimize the severity of an interruption in global operations are “table stakes”

Risk goes beyond direct suppliers and extends to secondary and tertiary suppliers in the network

Organizations need to understand their entire supplier networks and develop appropriate contingency plans

Leadership implications

Leaders with a playbook and practical experience in turnaround and crisis management will be in demand

Establishment of a risk management/mitigation officer as a core function within supply chain organizations is likely to increase

Dynamic testing of scenario responses in “good times” will become standard

In our complex, connected economy, global supply disruptions will continue, and companies will need to adapt.

Emerging supply chain trends

Most distribution centers are still manually operated – advanced robotics and technology will make for an improved business case for automation to support less human-intensive operations

Automated, data-centric spaces with the ability to monitor, track and optimize supply chain productivity limiting human exposure to risk enhances the ROI for capital

Leadership implications

Demand for leaders with experience in capital programs and manufacturing engineering, including advanced material handling and robotics

Executives able to develop and understand the business case for investments in physical automation, RPA, and AI will be valuable

Being proactive in taking care of people is a winning formula to ultimately take care of the business.

Emerging supply chain trends

New challenges call for new ways of working and new leadership characteristics

How supply chains operate and what makes for a top performing team will evolve

Leadership implications

“Authenticity” and “Empathy” from senior leaders will become more important than ever

Leaders able to adjust operating models and inspire teams in remote working conditions are part of the “new normal”

Questions For Reflection And Discussion

The end-to-end integration of supply chains

How do the different functions (plan, source, make, deliver) communicate and collaborate with each other in our organization? Are they working in silos and are the functions truly enterprise in their capabilities? Are consumer, end-user, and supplier data directly feeding into our supply chain systems?

The increasingly important role of procurement

What have we learned about the behavior and capability of our leaders in crisis situations? Who has stepped up and why?

Are our leaders able to cope with current trends and developments in the space? What does our pipeline of next generation executive talent look like within critical functions related to sourcing, procurement, and contract administration?

Who are the best-in-class developers of global procurement talent and what can we learn from them as a result of the crisis?

Digitization across the supply chain

Do we know what kind of supply chain performance data we have readily available and what data we need to ensure we improve operational and financial performance? How well positioned are our teams for continued opportunities and challenges related to digitization? Are internal team development plans sufficient to bridge the digitization gap or do we need to accelerate?

Risk in global operations and the impact on business performance

What digitally driven traceability and containment plans do we have in place to minimize fallout from a supply disruption or quality issue in our end to end supply chain? Do we have redundant manufacturing capability?

Do we have leadership that can develop a robust risk management plan that prevents or minimizes the severity of an interruption in our global operations? What about the capabilities of our suppliers?

What has the recent crisis revealed about our risk management capabilities?

Physical automation, advanced analytics, and RPA in the supply chain

What sorts of analyses have we done to understand the potential impact of physical and process automation to our supply chain capabilities? Are our teams positioned to adopt and deploy those systems?

How are we leveraging advanced analytics capabilities like machine learning and data science in our supply chains to make the best decisions about our supplier network and our own operations – especially in times of crisis?

Does the increased use of robotics make sense for us? Will it enable us to move manufacturing closer to destination markets while reducing the need for lower-cost labor?

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices