Executive Transitions and Onboarding in a Crisis | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Executive Transitions and Onboarding in a Crisis

Career TransitionsBoard Composition and SuccessionSuccessionHuman Resources OfficersDevelopment and TransitionAssessment and Benchmarking

Article

Ty Wiggins

April 07, 2020

7 min

Career TransitionsBoard Composition and SuccessionSuccessionHuman Resources OfficersDevelopment and TransitionAssessment and Benchmarking

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Today’s environment poses a set of new and heightened challenges for successful leadership transitions, making the process harder than ever before. In order to improve the likelihood of success for transitioning executives, organizations must acknowledge and approach these challenges with greater intentionality, speed, and structure.

Close

Ty Wiggins

London

Even in the best of circumstances, leadership transitions are tough. Failure rates are estimated at 40%, and it often takes 6 months or longer for a new leader to get to breakeven productivity levels.

Today, as leaders are operating in the most challenging circumstances most have ever faced, executive transitions are even harder. If organizations don’t change the way they welcome in new executives, it is safe to assume that failure rates will rise.

What can companies do to improve the likelihood of executive transition success, and help executives hit the ground running and get up to speed? Below are seven common challenges and recommended solutions from our experts. The complexity of internal transitions should not be underestimated and these challenges and solutions apply to internal appointments as well as external appointments.

Challenge 1: Hurdles to virtual onboarding are higher

Developing a thoughtful, well-run onboarding program is a challenge, and it is only harder when done virtually. An onboarding program needs to be substantive and informative, and it needs to enable relationship building and both short- and long-term success. All of this is complicated by current realities, and the fact that experiences that traditionally would have taken place face-to-face, or in a given location, now must be done by individuals who are working separately, or unable to visit offices, facilities, and clients.

Start early and move fast:

Start onboarding planning when you start interviewing candidates. Think about what projects you want them to work on, what relationships you want them to develop, and what quick wins you want them to achieve.

Map out all of the activities that take place through the onboarding that you would traditionally have designed to be done in person. Start working with others to figure out how to create workaround practices.

Challenge 2: Lack of support and difficulty accessing information

Under normal conditions, leaders in transition often articulate that there is a lack of support and information available to them early in their transition, at the time when they need it to advance their understanding of the business and their role. Much of the information leaders need when they move to a new organization is obtained through interactions with existing staff. While there are often large amounts of written information, the real insight of “how things work around here” is not written down. Limited access to people, especially face-to-face where people are more comfortable sharing this information, will inhibit a leader’s ability to get up to speed.

Build a dedicated support network:

Identify and build a dedicated support network for the new executive that provides a 360-degree view of the organization – consider including key direct reports, peers, their boss, and a senior HR or Communications leader.

Invest time in defining and enabling the role of each member of that network, and create mechanisms for holding those individuals accountable.

Provide the new leader with additional support to navigate the organization’s stakeholder landscape. A comprehensive stakeholder map is an excellent starting point that should provide a detailed overview of key stakeholders, insights, and challenges the leader will have to navigate.

Challenge 3: Key rapport-building methods lost

The favored method of building rapport in early relationships is still in person. Some leaders who are entering a new role where the workforce is remote will struggle if they are unable to connect to their team, clients, and stakeholders face-to-face. This extends to group presentations, town halls, and other mass meetings where a new leader gets to sell themselves and their vision. Leaders who rely on their ability to communicate in-person may struggle in the new remote working environment to build the confidence across the organization needed to be effective.

Enable relationship building:

Help your new executive by prioritizing virtual face-to-face meetings over phone calls to enable the same level of in-person relationship-building opportunities, for both formal and informal meetings.

Provide new leaders with a structured set of questions they can use during early interactions to help them build relationships and get the information they need.

While there will be significant pressure for your new executive to focus communications on the pressing business needs facing the organization, encourage them to move beyond this and to provide equal focus on building deeper relationships and showing authenticity.

The executive’s support network should help them design and test messaging and communication plans, as well as prepare for important stakeholder meetings.

Challenge 4: Decision making is sped up

For some leaders, joining their new organization in this crisis will be akin to joining a business in a severe turnaround. Out of necessity, decisions are being made quickly. For the new leader, this poses the challenge of needing to be decisive at a time when they lack both the historical and current organizational information to feel confident in the decisions they make. This opens them up to mistakes and significant stress and anxiety.

Help leaders achieve an “even faster” mindset:

Providing more information to the leader will be critical. This could involve pulling together a comprehensive package on the state of the business, a current state SWOT analysis, and a preliminary set of priorities that will need to be addressed shortly after the appointment.

Openly acknowledge that you are aware they are working without much of the information and support needed to make the best decisions possible given the circumstances.

Make a concerted effort to align on critical challenges and opportunities facing the business in advance of the appointment and take up responsibility for information gathering that might fall on the new leader’s shoulders during the early months of their transition.

Challenge 5: Demonstrating value is slowed down

In other organizations, everything (decisions, investments, initiatives, etc.) is slowed right down. The challenge here is that leaders in transition often focus on early wins and making an impact. Some leaders will be challenged by the lack of opportunity to demonstrate value, which may impact their levels of confidence and stress.

Caution patience where appropriate:

Openly discuss the pressures of performance and momentum that the new leader may be experiencing, and structure their transition plan around realistic deliverables to help build confidence.

Recalibrate transition expectations considering the current business context and agree on 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month scorecards.

Challenge 6: Assessing the team is (even) harder when remote

A key task for new leaders is to assess their team for performance, capability, and alignment with the intended strategy. The challenge with assessing teams during the current environment is firstly that this will happen remotely, and secondly that during crises some people rise while others struggle. It will be very difficult for any new leader to get a gauge on how their team behaves and performs in normal conditions if they have inherited them during this crisis.

Leverage resources and set expectations:

New executives should be given past performance reviews and be connected to others who can provide feedback on team members.

The new leader should be encouraged to quickly recalibrate expectations for performance and continuously communicate this to the team and broader organization.

Challenge 7: A growing sense of isolation

It is lonely at the top – and even more so when a leader is new and working remotely. They don’t have established relationships, a network of peers, or even a strong understanding of who does what and where in the organization. New leaders need a strong helping hand in their early days to fight away the inevitable feeling of isolation, and to quickly get them involved with their teams and the business.

Deliberately establish connections:

Keep new executives busy, even at the risk of overscheduling them. Their time shouldn’t be wasted, but instead focused on getting them involved quickly in substantive projects.

Establish a buddy system early on, where the new hire has someone above them, equal to them, and below them who they regularly interact with. Make it clear to those individuals that they have an important role to play in determining the new executive’s success or failure.

Putting it All to Work

These are unprecedented times and for senior leaders who are transitioning during this period, the challenges, as well as the risks, are increased. Looking through this crisis, there will be a new normal, and the executives you have and will recruit or promote, will be a key part of your future recovery. Increased support will help to ensure they survive their transition and are not only still in place but are well-positioned to help drive your organization’s recovery and growth after the current challenges subside.

Checklist: Onboarding in a Remote Environment

Before Onboarding: Building a Strong Foundation

This is a new relationship and needs to be purposefully managed: Inform the candidate of the expectation that all work will be remote for the foreseeable future. Inform them of how the company’s team plans to connect, engage and enable them to succeed.

The ability to communicate and transact data is critical to Day 1 as an executive: Ensure laptop, cell phone, and other hardware are prepared well before the start date. Establish a single point-of-contact for technical support. Also, identify an internal colleague who can be the first point-of-contact for “simple” questions about general operations.

1st Day: Getting Connected

The relationships formed on this day are critical to engagement, loyalty, and ramp-up for the new executive: Stick to the onboarding plan and schedule. Pre-scheduled meetings with the new hire should be treated as critical to the business. Provide a real-time update on the status of the business, revisions to strategy/plans, and key learnings from this situation.

1st Week: Building the Foundational Network

Establishing a foundational network of stakeholders is key to creating consistency and engagement for the executive: the Hiring Manager should conduct check-ins with appropriate stakeholders to confirm connectivity with the new executive. The Hiring Manager should also check in with the new executive at week’s end to get a pulse for overall onboarding success, consistency of messages communicated from other stakeholders, new concerns/perspectives, etc.

Communicate details around business strategy, operations, crisis management plan, etc.: Have direct reports spend at least one hour with new executive to communicate overall situation at hand and ensure group alignment.

1st Month: Solidifying Relationships

Provide avenues for the executive to have near-term impact and deliver value (direct and indirect) to establish brand and rapport: Ensure executive has clear expectations and a platform for communicating identified issues, proposed solutions, ideas, etc. The Hiring Manager should check-in with the new executive at month’s end to get a pulse for overall onboarding success, consistency of messages communicated from other stakeholders, new concerns/perspectives, etc.

Confirm the executive has established relationships and rapport to independently drive meetings, connections, and activities forward with limited support.

Consultant Author

Greg Desnoyers

Research Authors

Thomas Handcock
Pj Neal

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices