Interview with Former Coca Cola CEO Neville Isdell | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Former Coca Cola CEO Neville Isdell

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 16, 2022

9 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Neville Isdell offers insight on developing a pipeline of competent successors, reinventing corporate strategy, and staying ahead of the competition.

PLAY VIDEO

Neville Isdell offers insight on developing a pipeline of competent successors, reinventing corporate strategy, and staying ahead of the competition.

Coca-Cola’s Former CEO Neville Isdell On Strategy and Reinvention
—An Edited Transcript

Chapter 1 - Successful succession is all about the pipeline.

Roger Crockett: Neville, when you were asked to come back to Coke in 2004, what were the circumstances that brought you back as CEO?

Neville Isdell: Well, they weren’t good. That’s why they did something very unusual and went and fished an old guy like me out of retirement. Because I was sitting in Barbados, actually drinking a Coke, looking over the Caribbean, when the phone rang. And the issues were multiple. But the main issue was to get growth back into [the company]. And of course, behind all that was to get people to believe in the future of the company again.

Roger Crockett: The need to bring you back, what did that teach the board about succession planning?

Neville Isdell: They didn’t have anyone else internal. Now, they put in a very good process. Having recognized there was no one internal, they then put in a committee to do a proper search. And they cast the net far and wide. I mean, no one phoned me and said, “The job is yours.” I was only asked to throw my hat in the ring. And I went through a process. I was interviewed by all the directors, just like some of the other candidates. And then they decided that they wanted someone who knew the inside of the company, and they also knew me as well. So out of retirement I came. But they did do a very diligent search process, and I think there’s credit to them for that.

Roger Crockett: Right. Does that say something about developing a strong pipeline of talent internally?

Neville Isdell: Well, it is difficult. Certainly, in the succession process that I put in place for my successor, I had the advantage of there was a date certain when I was going to leave. I had come back with an agreement with the board that I was going to do a maximum of five years. That was a deal I had with the [corporate] board. And it was a deal I had with my board at home, called my wife, as well.

But actually that certainty meant that there was very good planning that could take place because the date was known. We could bring someone along and that’s exactly what we did. But you have to keep refreshing that succession plan. Really good leaders who are sitting as number two, don’t sit as number two for five, six, seven, eight years. They go somewhere else.

They’re in demand. And very often, the very good number twos, don’t step up to be good number ones, because what’s needed in terms of leadership and the loneliness of sitting at the top, they haven’t been exposed to. And it’s difficult for boards to identify that, because the individuals are succeeding, let’s say as the chief operating officer, the president. They seem to have all the qualities but there’s just one thing missing. And that is they’ve always had to report to someone. You’ve got to go back and see whether they have led organizations in the business on their own and how they’ve managed to do that.

Roger Crockett: How do you keep that pipeline warm? How do you keep it rich with five or six younger candidates who can grow into that role?

Neville Isdell: Identifying candidates and having that pool is actually the easier part, and boards do a reasonable job of that. The problem is the name in the envelope and renewing that name. Because you start with a person that is right at that point in time, but one of the things you’ll keep hearing me say is, “Everything is situational and situations change.” So the type of leader you need is going to change depending on both the internal and external dynamic. And I think that matching of skill sets, against the real needs of the business, is what is not done particularly well.

Chapter 2 - Understanding - and meeting - The Board’s expectations.

Roger Crockett: When you came back to Coke, to run it as CEO, you faced a kind of turnaround situation. How would you advise other CEOs who are coming into a similar situation?

Neville Isdell: I think every situation is different and I think it also has to be matched with your own individual skill set and personality. You shouldn’t advise people to try to be something that they’re not. Because people see through you, we all have our strengths and we all have our weaknesses. So, ‘know thyself’ is probably part of it, know what you bring to the equation. Then of course, it really does depend on what the situation is. I came back to a company that had very strong cash flows, a good balance sheet, but wasn’t growing. It had, in a way, a belief and a morale problem. So I had time. I also had time in terms of the expectations of the board. That’s one commonality I would actually point to. You as the incoming Chairman and CEO, or just CEO, need to have a very clear understanding with the board as to what they expect from you.

Chapter 3 - Catharsis first, then comes the turnaround.

Roger Crockett: Now, is this what you called, at the time, your “Manifesto for Growth?”

Neville Isdell: This is what became the “Manifesto for Growth.” This was the beginning of it. But the first stage was the catharsis. And the beginning of day two was, “Well, what are we going to do about it? It’s our company, we’re going to fix it.”

Roger Crockett: And why was that so important - to have your employees do it themselves, to grab hold of this particular challenge and task?

Neville Isdell: First of all, I believe that they knew more about the business and about what was wrong and what needed to be fixed. Number two, again, I had time. There was no edict from the mount when we had the strategy in place, because in fact, the top 150 managers had written it. We did electronic, anonymous voting. Nothing went in that didn’t get 87.5% support. If people said, “No, I don’t like it” then we went back to the drawing board. Now, there were some people who didn’t like the process, who didn’t think it was right, and they fell by the wayside. That’s the way it goes. But when we launched the strategy with the 87.5%, we were off and running. And now, you have a cohesiveness behind the implementation of the strategy.

Chapter 4 - “Challenge your teams - make them happy to be there.”

Roger Crockett: What can you say about the importance of empowering your team, giving them clear information and direction?

Neville Isdell: You can give support or you can not give support. But what you really have to do is make people make up their own minds to change what they’re doing. Getting people enthused to do something which they believe in, rather than giving orders. Now, I can give orders, and I do that, because you have to. We’re running businesses here, and there are times when you’ve got to step in and that’s it. I’m no patsy. But if you can make something meaningful for someone, that’s what we tried to do with the Manifesto - when they walk-in in the morning, they’re happy to be there. They’re challenged. Then you get much, much better performance.

Chapter 5 - Coke vs. The Cell Phone: Understanding the competition.

Roger Crockett: Let’s talk about the competition. Today, we are in an intensely competitive marketplace, as you were when you ran Coke. How often did you think about your competitor, Pepsi, and how much did those thoughts and what Pepsi did influence your strategy?

Neville Isdell:: Well, you think about them all the time. You have to. You think about the broader environment. And your competitive set sometimes is even broader than you think. I’ll give you an example. I remember a session when we were looking at a competitive set in Africa, and we decided that probably our biggest single competitor was the cell phone. Why? We were fighting for a small amount of discretionary income, whether they were going to have a soft drink or buy time for their cell phone. So sometimes your competitive set is actually rather peculiar. It’s not just the people who are in your space.

Roger Crockett: You mentioned that you thought about the competition, but does it influence what you do as a company?

Neville Isdell: It has to, but you need to not be deflected everyday just because of something they’ve done. You’ve got to think within your strategic frame. You may have to change your strategic frame, if they have done something that’s very different. An exercise that I did a few times in my career, which I find great fun and very interesting, was one I used when I felt that we were not taking the competition seriously and maybe we were feeling a little complacent ourselves. The first time we did this was in the Philippines. I got the management team in, and when they walked into the room I was wearing a Pepsi tee-shirt. We had Pepsi on the table and I gave Pepsi tee-shirts to them. We spent the day as the Pepsi management, strategizing how we were going to attack Coca-Cola. Now, it takes a little while for people to get comfortable, but eventually they get into it. You really uncover all your weaknesses. Pepsi didn’t know our own weaknesses as well as we did. By acting it out, and becoming them, we realized where some of our gaps were. And then it’s a lot easier to get rid of some of the complacency. You inevitably get this complacency in the business, you think ‘We’re winning, therefore we’re not doing anything wrong.’ Well, you’re sowing the seeds of your own destruction if you believe that!

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices