Interview with PNC Bank Chairman & CEO Jim Rohr | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with PNC Bank Chairman & CEO Jim Rohr

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview

May 13, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Jim Rohr, PNC Bank’s Chairman & CEO talks about managing risk, partnering with regulators, and acquiring top
talent in the Digital Age.

PLAY VIDEO

An Edited Transcript

Chapter 1 - “Sometimes it’s the things you don’t do that help save the company.”

Roger Crockett: You led the company to some of its best years and that meant avoiding the sub-prime
disaster right? What are your secrets to anticipating some severe events in the market such
as that, so that you can be successful?

Jim Rohr: That’s a great question. We use the concept of a risk-adjusted return on capital, and every single
activity that we have we look at the risk adjusted return on capital. To use your example of the
mortgage business, in the late 90’s Fannie and Freddie had taken all of the profitability out of the basic
mortgage business, and they grew their balance sheets to a combined $7 trillion. With their funding
and their leverage ratio as a government agency, frankly, the banks really didn’t make any money on
the basic mortgage business. So, the head of our mortgage company came to me and said, “Here’s
our risk-adjusted returns and there has been a lot of focus on it. The only way you can move these up
will be to go to sub-prime.” And he said, “Let me explain what happens in sub-prime. There’s no down
payment, there’s no coverage for the income, and when the recession comes it ends in tears.” And so
we sold the mortgage company. We weren’t getting the right return. We’d looked at the future, and the
risk profile that was going to be required simply wasn’t consistent with the kind of returns required. So
we sold the mortgage company in early 2002.

Sub-prime lending went from 3% to 37% of the mortgage business. Everybody went to sub-prime.
Everybody basically made a bet on US housing prices. Those housing prices had gone up for 25 years, but
like some things in life, they’re good until they’re not. And if they’re not, then they’re very bad. And that’s
what happened to us this time. So a lot of times it’s things you don’t do that help save the company.

Roger Crockett: And perhaps it has to do with staying true to your core principles because it would be very
enticing to go after the numbers that everyone else did in sub-prime, right?

Jim Rohr: Well, for sure. We were criticized actually in 2004, 05 and 06 by some shareholders who said, “You’re not
growing loans fast enough.” And we said, “We didn’t like the kinds of loans that other people were growing,
and we didn’t get the right risk-adjusted returns. You have to maintain your discipline around your values.

Chapter 2 - Managing Risk

Roger Crockett: Jim, would you share a few of the approaches you take as a company to making sure that
everyone understands and manages risk appropriately?

Jim Rohr: Risk is in everybody’s business and it’s always been in everyone’s business. But I think frankly the pace
of change today and the kinds of flexibility that all of this communication and the Internet provides, has
caused change to be much more rapid. So the sense of risk is different, and it takes an empowered
group of people, the entire company, to be in the risk business. We tell everybody in the company,
every single town hall meeting I ask people whoever’s involved with risk please raise their hand. If they
don’t all raise their hands then we have a misunderstanding.

We’re serious about it. Because many people around the company have heard me say, “If we have a
teller cashing a fraudulent check it doesn’t matter who the chief risk officer is, we have a risk and we’re
not managing it.” Virtually every company is in some form of risk business, so it’s the management of
risk, not just the taking of risk that makes you successful over time.

Roger Crockett: Now are you speaking just of financial risk, or are you speaking of risk more broadly than that?

Jim Rohr: Every single person in the company, no matter what activity they’re involved in, is in the risk space.
So it’s easy to say that somebody who’s lending money or trading securities or buying bonds is in the
risk space. Let’s take our advertising group, not one that would be immediately thought of as risky.
However, if we say the wrong thing in the press, reputational risk today is maybe as costly as anything
that a bank does, or maybe any company for that matter. So every single part of the company is really
in the risk space. Operational risk, we take a great deal of operational risk processing people’s checks.
We’ve got many people who are trying to crack into our systems every day, we have to protect our
depositors’ money, and so those are all different kinds of operational risk. There’s lots of different risks
that the company takes, and everybody in the company has some piece of it.

Chapter 3 - “Regulators are real people.”

Roger Crockett: Well, let’s turn to another area of change, which is the area of regulation in your industry.
Companies in all industries are now forced to be far more transparent. How does your board
manage this new era of regulation?

Jim Rohr: I think we have to be very transparent with the board as well. We have our regulators meet with the
board. We actually have the regulators meet with different committees of the board so that the board
understands where the regulators are coming from. So that it’s not always the exact way you read about
it in the paper. Regulators are real people. Frankly, the regulators want the industry to succeed. They
get no pleasure or benefit out of the industry failing. And so in the end, the regulators can actually be
your partners. In many ways they are, and that’s a good thing. You have to understand that they have
a perspective that’s different than yours, sometimes broader and as a partner that can help. So that’s
good, but you also have to understand that they’re in the business of protecting the depositor. And
the company has a broader responsibility to shareholders, employees and depositors. By the way, the
shareholder doesn’t do too well if the depositors doesn’t do well. So it’s not in conflict, but we do have a
little broader agenda than they do.

It’s good to have these broad communications with the board on the regulatory front. Every board
meeting we have a regulatory presentation. We have a chief regulatory officer and he makes a
presentation to the board on where we stand on all of our exams, all of our ratings. We’re very
transparent with the board ourselves and so are the regulators. It’s a big part of our business, bigger
than ever now with the regulations changing. And you have to manage it.

Roger Crockett: And, of course, you had to grow over the years in coming to that understanding of the
importance of regulation. Talk about some of the lessons that you’ve learned over time in
adjusting to the pressure of regulation.

Jim Rohr: Well, we did have a time where we agreed with the auditors on an accounting issue. The regulators
disagreed, and it was a problematic issue for the company.

You have two different sets of regulators and we had a conflict between the SEC and the Fed. You’ve
got to work your way through that, and we were not as proactive as we might have been, and we
learned from that. We needed to be much more proactive and understand that they were our partners.

Chapter 4 - “Talent acquisition starts from the top down."

Roger Crockett: Let’s talk a little bit about talent acquisition. You mentioned earlier that you have talent on the
team that focuses on regulation, for example. You’ve also been successful at recruiting unique
talent from different parts of the industry. What is your approach in this day and age to talent
acquisition?

Jim Rohr: Talent acquisition is as important a thing as you do within the company, because the people are the
company quite frankly. And so I think we realized some time ago it’s not just the recruiting department
that was in the talent acquisition business. I often use the example of our inclusion officer. If our inclusion officer was in charge of hiring all the people that we need the company has no chance of being
successful. Just like if the risk officer was in charge of all the risk we couldn’t possibly be a success.
So you have to really understand that it’s everybody’s business, if not everybody then many people’s
business, to recruit people to come to the company.

I myself get involved in recruiting senior leaders. Any company needs to understand they have to have
a group of diverse people with diverse talent and diverse culture in order to pull together the kind of
expertise they need to be successful in their business. And you have to do that at the top but also all the
way down too.

Roger Crockett: Well in particular, you’ve brought in some talent that has been impressive on the financial side -
your CFO; also in PR and in technology. Why were those areas important for you?

Jim Rohr: Well, every company has to understand which areas are the most important areas in the company. As
the CEO, bluntly you’ve got to understand what you’re good at and what you’re not good at. And that’s
true for every manager really. So, you have to be able to go out and recruit and develop the kinds of
people who have the expertise that you don’t. In the case of a financer, we went out and recruited an
excellent finance person in the area of asset liability and management. Today we have a real expertise
in asset liability and management that we didn’t have before. And on the public relations side, we had a
long history of not being particularly good at public relations, and it is a business. You have to understand
that public relations is a fulltime business. In communications and public relations we went out and hired
a group of people that I’m particularly confident in, and I think we’re pretty good at that now.

So, you’ve got to really be honest with yourself. It starts with honesty with yourself, about what you’re
good at and what you’re not. And you’ve got to be honest about your team as to who’s good and
who’s not and who’s developable and who’s not. Hopefully, we’re able to develop from within in all of
those areas, but if you don’t start with excellent leadership you have a hard time.

Chapter 5 - The digital transformation.

Roger Crockett: Well, one of the most dramatic areas of change of course has been in the digital technology area
and I know you’ve hired there. How important in your mind is it to have digital acumen on your
team in this day and age?

Jim Rohr: Six years ago there was no Skype, no Facebook, no Twitter. Apple was on the verge of bankruptcy and
Blockbuster Video was the number one entertainment company in the United States. That’s six years
ago, and my goodness how things have changed.

It’s not going to stop. Change is going to be with us right along. And so if you embrace change you
have an opportunity to really win. If you want to just say, “Okay, well I’m not going to change and I’m
going to keep doing it the old way,” you have no chance. And so what we’ve done in PNC is we’ve
used some outside consultants, and we’ve hired some people inside. But what we really do is we
rely on the businesses to talk every quarter about what things are developing in the new world, the
digital world—whether they’re going to use Twitter or how the online system is changing, what kind of
electronic payments systems do we have, what are the enhancements we’re building to ‘myCFO’ so the
small business can interface with the internet differently? So that’s embedded in each business. I know
some companies will set up an innovations office. So, there’s an innovation officer who comes and tells
you how to interface, and that might be successful for them. But really the way we look at it is that every
business, every activity is in some mode of change. And so everybody in those activities has to have this
pace of change mindset so that they can keep up with what’s going on in their part of the company.

Roger Crockett: So, everyone across the company needs to be serious about innovating?

Jim Rohr: Yes, everybody. Whether it’s operational, whether its communications or whether it’s the payment
sector, everybody has to be in the innovations business.

Roger Crockett: You say you’ve brought in some outside consultants. You’ve also brought some CEO’s and
Presidents in the tech industry to talk to your board—to remind them how important change
is, right?

Jim Rohr: Absolutely, we’ve done that with various presidents of different technology companies who come
and speak to our board every year. So the board gets a sense of how rapidly things are changing.
Now, some of the board is intimately involved in technology themselves; we’ve got the retired Chief
Operating Officer of Verizon.

So, it’s important to bring refreshers to the board in terms of CEO’s of technology companies. And
obviously we’re in the marketplace every day talking about it across the company

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices