Revitalizing Purpose: Q&A with Elcin Barker Ergun | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Revitalizing Purpose: Q&A with Elcin Barker Ergun

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

Dana Krueger

January 21, 2021

15 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

RRA Healthcare interview series

Healthcare Leading Forward: Sustainable Leadership in Action

Close

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

Elcin Barker Ergun is CEO of the Menarini Group, a global biopharma company based in Florence, Italy. She joined Menarini as the Group CEO in 2019 with over three decades of leadership experience, including Merck and GlaxoSmithKline. During that time, she has held commercial, finance, and innovation leadership roles around the globe.

Recently, Elcin spoke with Alessandra Abate, Managing Director and Leader of the Global Biotech and Pharmaceuticals Practice and Dana Krueger, Managing Director and Global Healthcare Sector Leader for Russell Reynolds Associates. She shared how Menarini has leveraged its strengths and revitalized its commitment to purpose during the COVID-19 pandemic.

The interview presented below has been edited and abridged for clarity.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

Alessandra Abate: Thank you for being here with us, Elcin. Our topic today is sustainability and purpose. We are ten months into a new era in which COVID-19 has triggered a lot of thinking on these issues, particularly in the healthcare industry and among healthcare leaders. With that, we are curious to hear how you are talking and thinking about purpose and sustainability within Menarini.

Elcin Barker Ergun: Thank you very much, Alessandra. Indeed, it has been a little over a year in Menarini, and it has been an interesting time with COVID-19, which was certainly an unexpected global health challenge. But in a way, it has also been a very good time of revitalizing purpose in the pharmaceutical industry. I have never been prouder to be a member of the pharmaceutical industry and am privileged to have the chance to lead during these difficult times. All of us united very quickly, both across different companies as well as within each of the organizations, and have been trying to adjust as needed in the business, while also trying to keep our people safe, which was of course the most important priority when the crisis hit. Immediately after that, we had to be extremely responsible, recognizing that we are part of the solution.

A very immediate need in the beginning was sanitizing gels, so we converted part of our factory in Florence to start distributing sanitizing gels to healthcare professionals. To date, we have distributed around 280 tons of gels, and we continue to do that. We are one of the few companies that also has a diagnostics arm, and we were not initially in infectious diseases, but we have a great infrastructure to leverage, and evaluated how we could mobilize different units. Our team did a fantastic job, because the testing capacity and capability of each country by and large determined the pace of how the country could curb the disease. We started with bringing in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for essential laboratories, then continued with portable PCRs, and then moved to rapid tests, which have become an important screening tool.

In parallel, we kept our 17 manufacturing sites up and running all around the world, with rigorous measures to serve millions of patients who have to continue using the right drugs for their treatment. We have an important contribution to patients’ lives – the core purpose of why we exist in the first place.

These days, we are also trying to see what other ways we can contribute, which of course includes test developments, such as for the flu and COVID-19. We are also considering collaborations that will allow us to be the technology and manufacturing partner for an important Italian antibody initiative. If all goes well, that could come to the market within 2021. Our biotech facility in Pomezia-Italy is actually working on this technology at the moment, and we are anticipating that clinical trials can start early next year.

This whole effort, and what our teams are achieving, is very much in line with the core values of Menarini, the first of which is responsibility and the second, dedication and commitment. Our teams really embody the core, the DNA, of our company.

Dana Krueger: Thank you for that interesting and inspiring summary of how you have responded to the crisis and now how you are thinking about the future. You make it all sound so easy. Can you tell us a little bit more about your leadership and how you are tangibly anchoring purpose in the day-to-day, as well as how you are proliferating that through the other leaders of the organization?

Elcin Barker Ergun: This was a big team effort with a committed Board, and a task force comprised of our senior leaders in the company. We empowered the task force to come up with the right initiatives, and we truly delivered this through team collaboration, where we were able to mobilize Menarini’s entire global workforce of 17,000 people.

From a day-to-day perspective, our industry has two missions to deliver on impacting patients’ lives. One is innovation, bringing new therapies to patients. The other is access, making sure that patients can access those treatments. We have been focusing our research in oncology, where there have been some important successes in bringing high quality therapies to the market in the last five to ten years, but there is still unmet need in many cancer treatments. That is one area of focus for us. The other area where Menarini has been a leader for a long time is cardiovascular disease. Similarly, even though there are many relevant products in the market, cardiovascular disease is still the leading cause of death in the world. We will keep focusing our efforts on these areas.

As a leader, your key responsibility is to remove obstacles and enable the team so that they can deliver on the key missions of innovation and access. Additionally, you also need to be a role model in your day-to-day actions, beyond the strategic mission and accomplishments everyone is striving for. To share a small example from my past: I was the country head for a company that was engaged in a disease area that affects children. Some of the employees wanted to start a company orchestra and sought sponsorship from me. I was fully in support of this great idea but suggested they set aside dedicated weekends to perform for the children. They were initially hesitant to commit weekends, but also motivated and passionate, so the orchestra came true – and they did play for the children and they were very happy about that. It all stayed within the company by the way; we did not engage in any PR. For me, the key point was to plant a seed, to help people see that it is not just about the drugs we make – it is about the well-being of the people. If we are able to empathize with patients, and truly think about the well-being of people around us, these seeds will grow into actions that we as leaders can engage in, to help with the mission.

Alessandra Abate: Thank you for sharing, Elcin, that is really touching. One of the things that I was curious about – and it is very much linked to this – how is the team evolving into a new mindset in light of all that has happened within a COVID year?

Elcin Barker Ergun: The team in Menarini has always been successful in managing the complexities of our many operations. Of course, the COVID-19 period has added an additional layer of complexity, but again, it is through these difficult times that strong values of Menarini such as adaptability, and resilience shine through, and allow us to continue performing well.

What is very important is that even during the ongoing pandemic, we do not lose sight of other important priorities in line with our values. One of them, for instance, was inclusion. This is something that we take very seriously within the leadership team. As you can imagine, as a woman leader, this has always been important for me, because I fundamentally believe women have to help other women advance their careers. In my past, in different companies, I have always been someone who mentored, coached, and appointed other women who are doing very well in board positions, in senior positions, in large country positions. My experience was always that you have to remove the bias from the system as a starting point. If you can fundamentally agree with your leadership team that you have to put the right person in the right place, everything will flow from there, or at least it has always been in my experience. With this natural mindset, we have made key appointments that show a nice 50 percent balance [of men and women] so far. Given the period we are going through, I am really proud that the team has achieved this.

Dana Krueger: Menarini is clearly one of the beacons of the Italian healthcare landscape, and very globally active, as you have mentioned. In addition to what you are describing – being at the forefront of advancing the well-being of people, promoting inclusion as a very strong agenda point – what else do you hope Menarini does for the industry under the theme of sustainable leadership?

Elcin Barker Ergun: One key area that I want to highlight is anti-microbial resistance. This crisis reminded us how vulnerable we are. Unfortunately, more than one million patients have died from COVID-19, but there is also about 700,000 patients dying from antimicrobial resistance every year. This number is increasing and increasing, and unfortunately, there are not enough incentives in this area for companies to find solutions. Many biotech companies went bankrupt before they could make any profit. And there is an important paradigm here in the sense that, due to the nature of resistance, it is difficult to pinpoint the right treatment moment, and these antibiotics are pushed to the very end stage. It is a delicate situation, because there is a possibility of losing the patient.

Given the extent of this crisis, the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations (IFPMA) came together and did a leadership event on this recently. And now, 20 companies have come together – we are one of them – and IFPMA made an investment pledge of USD 1 billion in the coming years to bring two to four new antibiotics to the market. In Menarini, we have a portfolio and we are one of the few companies in the world who continue to do research in this area and bring products to market. I want to highlight it, because I think it shows the sustainable leadership of Menarini in this area. Even though not many are investing here, we are committed, because we want to be part of the solution. What we will do here will impact the future – perhaps even prepare us for the next big crisis.

Dana Krueger: That is so inspiring to hear, because as you mentioned at the beginning of our conversation, the industry has really come together in ways that it had not previously. And I love this example around anti-bacterial resistance because that indicates to me that this partnership model in some way is going to be durable for the most intractable health issues that we have on a global stage.

Elcin Barker Ergun: That is exactly the point. I think from here we will be in action mode and hopefully we will be able to also engage broader stakeholders around the issue.

Alessandra Abate: Elcin, on behalf of all of us, we just wanted to say thank you very much for spending time with us today, for sharing your views, your insights at Menarini Group. We look forward to sharing this with a broader audience so that others can be inspired too. Thank you very much.

Elcin Barker Ergun: Thank you – it was really a pleasure.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices