Interview with Paula Bellizia, President Brazil, Microsoft | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

Q&A with Paula Bellizia - Winning over hearts as well as minds

Q&A with Paula Bellizia - Winning Over Hearts as Well as Minds

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionBoard and CEO AdvisoryHuman Resources Officers

Interview

March 22, 2018

4 min

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionBoard and CEO AdvisoryHuman Resources Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

What are the major challenges that you have faced in your career? Where is Brazil its diversity and inclusion journey?

Close

"Winning over hearts as well as minds"— Tatyana Freitas interviews Paula Bellizia, President Brazil, Microsoft.

"Culture change on diversity and inclusion happens through speaking about it every day, living it yourself, coaching people on why it is important and ultimately winning over their hearts as well as their minds." An interview with Paula Bellizia, President Brazil, Microsoft.

Paula Bellizia has been leading the Microsoft Brazil operations, the largest in Latin America, since July 2015. Paula has over 24 years of experience. She began her career in Marketing at Whirlpool in 1992 and after seven years joined Telefonica as Product Group Manager. She left Telefonica in 2002 to begin her career at Microsoft as Small and Medium Business Sales Manager. In her 10 years at Microsoft, she held different roles, until assuming the Director of Marketing and Operations role. She left Microsoft in 2013 and joined Facebook as Sales Director for Small and Midsize Business for Latin America.

She is a member of the Economic and Social Development Council (CDES) from the presidency of Brazil and of the boards of directors of Arezzo & Co. and Brasscom - Brazilian Association of Information Technology and Communication Companies. Paula is also a member of the ICC Commission on Corporate Responsibility and Anti-corruption the Brazil International Chamber of Commerce. She is a Champion of the global non-profit iamtheCODE.

Tatyana Freitas: As a senior executive woman, in an environment dominated by male leaders, what are some of the challenges that you have faced?

Paula Bellizia: When I reflect back on my career, I am lucky enough to have never experienced significant challenges because of my gender, but I can think of many times when unconscious biases have been very apparent. For example, new clients are sometimes surprised when they hear about my leadership role.

There is also a common misconception in Brazil that a successful woman cannot have a family, which is not the case. I am married and have had children, and it is the strength of my family unit that has helped me to grow and thrive in the workplace. These unconscious biases can be very challenging and organisations must try to fight them every day. The only way to do this is to consciously understand and address these biases.

Certainly as a senior woman in the workplace, I have a responsibility set an example for the rest of the organisation by fighting bias.

Tatyana Freitas: And following from that comment, do you see yourself as a role model for other women?

Paula Bellizia: I am certainly an example of a positive journey, but I prefer not to see myself as a role model, as for me, that might suggest that other women should follow the same journey that I have been on. In fact, we should encourage women to strive to take different paths. That said, considering my position as a senior executive, I do feel a huge sense of responsibility to keep diversity and inclusion top of mind within my organisation and in Brazil. I do this by maintaining the dialogue of the business case and talking about the importance of diversity in its broadest definition. Gender is only one perspective, we must also consider style, experiences, background, life stories, etc. I feel a responsibility as a senior female leader to educate and speak up.

Tatyana Freitas: Where do you feel Brazil is on this journey?

Paula Bellizia: Brazil is one of the most diverse countries in the world and I see that as a competitive advantage. Yet we must learn to fully harness the diversity that is around us in order to truly gain the benefits. Ultimately, this is about changing the culture and requires focus and patience. You need to work on changing a culture every day, you can’t take your eye off the ball, or people continue to accommodate past behaviours and prevent progress. Culture change on diversity and inclusion happens through speaking about it every day, living it yourself, coaching people on why it is important and ultimately winning over their hearts as well as their minds. It is a journey and Brazil is learning and improving, but I think we can move faster.

Paula Bellizia: And at Microsoft?

A: At Microsoft, diversity and inclusion is core to our business, it is one of our cultural pillars. This is crucial, because any organisation can try to attract diverse talent, but if the organisation doesn't have the right culture that will embrace and welcome this talent, then efforts to recruit diverse talent are wasted. Organisations must ask themselves: what will make all employees successful? What can the organisation do to ensure their success? Are all voices being heard? Are we truly including everyone? Organisations must pay a little more attention to inclusion so that we are truly able to develop and retain diverse talent.

Thank you, Paula.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices