Interview with Margherita Della Valle, deputy group chief financial officer, Vodafone | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

Q&A with Margherita Della Valle - “Get on board—the role of non-executives in driving diversity and inclusion”

Q&A with Margherita Della Valle - “Get on Board—the Role of Non-Executives in Driving Inclusion and Culture”

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionBoard and CEO AdvisoryHuman Resources Officers

Interview

David Mills

July 06, 2018

3 min

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionBoard and CEO AdvisoryHuman Resources Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

What role can the board play to drive inclusion and culture? How does their role compare to that of the executives?

Close

David Mills

London

“Get on board—the role of non-executives in driving inclusion and culture”—David Mills interviews Margherita Della Valle, deputy chief financial officer at Vodafone, on the role of non-executives in driving inclusion and culture within their organizations.

What role can the board play to drive inclusion and culture? How does their role compare to that of the executives?

"An inclusive culture in the boardroom is about opening the door to different people and welcoming different inputs. It is easy to work with like-minded people because we understand each other's language, but to truly be inclusive, the board must adapt to different styles, which ultimately maximizes the contribution of all the board members." An interview with Margherita Della Valle, deputy group chief financial officer, Vodafone

Margherita holds both executive and non-executive roles in two FTSE 100 organizations—as deputy group chief financial officer of Vodafone and as chair of the Audit Committee for Centrica. She is also a trustee of the Vodafone Foundation.

Vodafone is considered a leader in the D&I space and has launched several truly pioneering initiatives. In 2015, Vodafone was one of the first multinationals to introduce a worldwide mandatory minimum global maternity policy, and in March 2017 the business launched the “Re-Connect” program, designed to provide people who have taken a career break, many of them likely to be women who have quit their jobs to raise a family, with a way of returning to work. Margherita and the entire executive team at Vodafone have been critical in driving these groundbreaking initiatives.

David Mills: What role should the board play in driving inclusion and culture within the organization?

Margherita Della Valle: Ultimately, it is about setting the tone for the company. This has to stay at a high level and shouldn’t interfere with day-to-day management. But the board should continuously ask questions, both about the current inclusion and culture statistics as well as the strategy of talent management. Through the board keeping the topic on the agenda, it sets the tone for the rest of the organization that this is seen as important.

David Mills: Are there any instances where the board can have a direct impact rather than just setting the tone?

Margherita Della Valle: The board has a number of opportunities in which they meet the management of the company at different levels, and often it is these times that can have a more direct impact.

I remember a time when the board went for a tour around one of the gas terminals. There was a young woman who had just been appointed to run the terminal, and all the employees reporting to her were longstanding and experienced. I believe that the way that the board engaged with her helped change the dynamic. It was the board’s role to support her leadership through the way we interacted with her and showed we respected her position and achievements. I believe that this will have an impact on the way that her team will view her in the future.

David Mills: Any other practical examples?

Margherita Della Valle: It’s also about listening to the organization and reacting. We once had a senior woman who had decided that once she went on maternity leave, there would not be a role at the organization for her to come back to because of her work-life balance needs. The board was told of this situation, which led to a number of conversations about how we could avoid this happening in the future. We confronted the issue directly, which was very successful, and she now leads one of the biggest divisions in the company. It is about learning from those examples.

David Mills:  How does the board create an inclusive working culture?

Margherita Della Valle: An inclusive culture in the boardroom is about opening the door to different people and welcoming different inputs. It is easy to work with like-minded people because we understand each other’s language, but to truly be inclusive, the board must adapt to different styles, which ultimately maximizes the contribution of all the board members.

David Mills: What is the distinction between the role of non-executives and the executives?

Margherita Della Valle: The board can set the tone and ask questions, but it is the executives who ultimately have to deliver. This is why it is so important that we focus on inclusion and culture at the executive committee level as well as on the board.

Despite the difference in roles, it is important for the chair and CEO to be aligned on the importance of inclusion and culture, and this partnership can make a real difference in terms of progress, as it shows the rest of the organization that this is something both the chair and CEO prioritize.

David Mills: How do the CEO and board articulate the importance of inclusion and culture to the rest of the organization?

Margherita Della Valle: I do think that target setting can be helpful to focus the mind. When there is more pressure, people need to act on it and that does tend to work in driving inclusion and culture. But it’s not all about targets; culture has a key part to play and even the small things can have a real impact. For example, if the promotion language is dominated by a “male version” of leadership, it can have hugely damaging implications on the progression of female talent within the organization.

David Mills:  But how do you make people realize that this language can be so damaging? Quite often people appear to not realize the impact.

Margherita Della Valle: It’s a tricky one … the only real solution is to have more inclusion and culture in senior leadership so that these leaders can call people out on the language that they use. It’s also about creating an environment where employees can give upward feedback. But, as you said, the thing that is so tricky about this use of language is that people don’t realize it is a problem.

Thank you, Margherita.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices