Interview with Motorola Solutions Chairman & CEO Greg Brown | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Motorola Solutions Chairman & CEO Greg Brown

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview

May 13, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Greg Brown, Chairman and CEO of Motorola Solutions, stresses the importance of communication, avoiding corporate arrogance and preserving the organizational culture in order to excel under pressure.

PLAY VIDEO

Roger Crockett: So Tom Peters the leadership guru wrote the legendary book In Search of Excellence back
in 1982 when he popularized his term management by wandering around. Today things
are different, more global. How do you recommend managing in an environment like this?

Greg Brown: Well I still think you do manage by wandering about, but you do that and manage by staying
connected. So it’s gotten a little bit additive. There’s no substitute for personal interaction
in the cafeteria, in a hallway, in other offices. But now, to your point, it’s staying connected
electronically, by email, Internet, video.

Roger Crockett: How do you communicate messages to your troops in times of a crisis or real challenging
times – the economy forces you to spin off a part of your business or you have a
restructuring. Then what do you do? What is key to making sure that everyone remains
engaged and everyone remains interested?

Greg Brown: Roger, that’s a great question. I think it’s combining the why with the what. If the what is a layoff,
if the what is a discontinuation of a product - what is the why, and what do we do next? So the
reason as an example we divested our [mobile] networks [infrastructure] business is because
it’s not strategic to Motorola. We only have 3% market share. The employees and associates
are better in the hands of a leading infrastructure player instead of a subscale one. So you
communicate the reality of the situation and what’s happening. But more important Roger, to
your point, you have to communicate why, why are we doing this? Why is this good for the firm?
Why is it good for me? Any communication has to be individualized and internalized because
every person that hears it, regardless of the medium, has to judge it, react to it, and then decide
what to do.

Roger Crockett: So if it’s something monumental like a spin off, like some sort of reorganization, then how
do you impart that message?

Greg Brown: I think typically the most effective way is a video Webcast. It’s important not just for people
to hear the message, it’s important that they see you, observe you. Hear your tone, see your
vulnerability, your honesty, your character. And then I always believe there’s no communications
without Q&A. So I don’t want it to be one-way I want it to be two-way. As a leader you are
always responsible to make sure that you’re willing to hear dissenting opinions, willing to be selfdeprecating, willing to say, “I don’t know, we’re in this together.” So you can send an email, and
there’s times when that’s appropriate, but in mission critical [situations] I think it’s in person and
Webcast.

Roger Crockett: Well, let’s talk a little bit about culture then. Culture is always difficult to create, and then
of course, to maintain. And I would think it’s even more difficult to maintain in times of
economic struggle, in times of corporate change. How important do you think it is to
maintain the culture? And how do you go about doing that?

Greg Brown: I think culture is two things. It’s what you do and it’s how you do it. That’s plain and simple what
it is. Culture is the representation of the leader and the leadership team, and it’s an aggregation
of the individuals. So a culture is defined largely by its leader and its people. It’s about what you
focus on and how you do it. What and how. I think that if you’re in a crisis and you’re trying to
define your culture it’s too late. By the way, it’s not a binary thing. It’s not a “we have it and it’s
done.” You’ve got to reinforce it, communicate, inject, revitalize, represent, embody—everyday,
every week, 24/7.

Roger Crockett: Greg, what about, maintaining the balance between culture and strategy. Sometimes
culture can be almost detrimental.

Greg Brown: Absolutely. Culture trumps strategy every time. You can have the best laid plans but if you don’t
have the right people and the right environment, the power points, the vision, the words, then
the mission goes nowhere. So I don’t think of them as disconnected. I actually focus more on
people and if you have the right people you will have and get the right strategy. When you make a
wrong decision or you require modification or an adaptation to the strategy, you by definition have
the resilience and the adaptability because you picked the right people with the right values and
behaviors. So [culture and strategy] are intertwined.

Roger Crockett: We all understand that people are key. People get a little antsy during difficult economic
times. People get a little antsy when a company is spinning off and may begin to think
about, “Is this going to be right for me.” How do you handle that so that you can preserve
what you have there in order to execute perfectly?

Greg Brown: I think great companies and great cultures have an outside-in view, not an inside-out view. So
customers provide insight and oxygen. Investors and the media provide observation and criticism.
I think those are very useful mechanisms to listen and learn and incorporate reality—good or bad,
right or wrong, fair or unfair. We put those ingredients into our thinking and into our behaviors and
acknowledge them.

Roger Crockett: Very often leadership teams don’t appear to get the ride right when they’re faced by
challenge. It might be an economic challenge. It might be a marketplace challenge, a shift
in the marketplace, a shift in competition, but companies stumble and lose their way. Why
is that? How does that always happen? What can be done to correct that?

Greg Brown: My view is that it’s largely a failure of leadership. People and organizations reflect their leadership.
Whatever the challenge: it could be economic, it could be technological, it could be geographical,
but usually it’s a reflection of failed leadership. It’s leadership that doesn’t incorporate or change
fast enough, leadership that clings to the familiar and pushes and stiff-arms the unknown.
Leadership that will ride a product too long. Leadership that will become insular and withdrawn in
adversity and not know what to do.

Roger Crockett: With culture there are many examples where arrogance somehow creeps in to a corporate
culture. What are the checks that you would recommend a management team take to stifle
that and allow performance, high performance over the long term?

Greg Brown: That’s a very good point I should have mentioned earlier because that’s another common thing.
I think arrogance needs to be held in check and is the responsibility of management, the CEO
and the board. Boards don’t manage companies but they do govern them. And boards are
responsible for CEO succession planning and the validation of strategy. So they must be curious
and penetrating and demanding, not in a managerial way but in a validating way. So I think part of
keeping senior-level or CEO arrogance in check is the responsibility of the board. Now, hopefully
you’re not picking a CEO in the first place that has that hubris or those characteristics, but the
board plays a very important role.

As a CEO it’s important for me to get information from multiple levels because by the time
everything comes to me it’s good. People do not want to come into my office and say, “I blew it,
we have a problem, I made a mistake.” That’s just human nature. Part of the way I invite people
to [speak openly] is by sharing my fallibilities and my mistakes. And I want to make sure that we
have an environment where that bi-directional exchange is healthy. The second answer to your
question is trust but verify. Go visit a product manager, go out on the assembly line, go to a key
supplier, visit your customers. And then have your time team do the same.

Roger Crockett: And I think that’s so key because sometimes you might find that this hubris, this arrogance
is creeping into level 2 or 3, beneath the executive management team, and sometimes it’s
hard to pick that up until it’s too late.

Greg Brown: Roger I think success is the biggest impediment to growth but arrogance is death. It’s death for a
company

Roger Crockett: So particularly in times of challenge what mistake can a leader not afford to make?

Greg Brown: Don’t succumb to the convenient or the quick. Sometimes you’ll feel like you’re on the clock
and a decision has to be made. Appropriate deliberation over expedience is fundamentally key,
and some of the mistakes that I made I think I felt the pressure to act too quickly. Over the last
three years, a period I would considered to be crunch time, when this company faced some very
dark days—questions about liquidity, [doubts about the viability] of our mobile devices business,
shareholder activist Carl Icahn’s pressure on our board that was stressed—the big mistakes that I
made were around people and probably moving too quickly.

Roger Crockett: You mentioned Carl Icahn, a gentleman who has become familiar to a lot of different
boards in the corporate world. What can you share that might be educational for a board
or a management team when you have an outsider that is pressuring the company for
one reason or another, justly or unjustly? And in your case you decided to accept that
representative onto your board. But how do you as a management team deal with that kind
of outside pressure?

Greg Brown: I was an advocate, a big advocate of settling with Carl Icahn and inviting him onto our board
because if he sees what we see I would suspect he’ll have a better understanding of the business
and a better understanding of the situation and could be collaborational in resolution. I think that
the advice I’d give is be very straightforward, be very open, and work together.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices