An Interview with HBS Professor Tsedal Neeley | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

Q&A with Tsedal Neeley

Q&A with Tsedal Neeley

Technology and InnovationInclusive LeadershipTransformation and InnovationInclusionLeadershipBoard and CEO Advisory

Interview

March 12, 2018

7 min

Technology and InnovationInclusive LeadershipTransformation and InnovationInclusionLeadershipBoard and CEO Advisory

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Tsedal Neeley speaks about her research, challenges and benefits of global corporations and the role language should play in corporate partnerships.

Close

An Interview with HBS Professor Tsedal Neeley on the Language of Global Success

Tsedal Neeley is an associate professor of business administration at Harvard Business School, and the author of The Language of Global Success:  How a Common Tongue Transforms Multinational Organization.

Q: How did you first become interested in the strategic use of language in organizations?

The seed of my interest in the strategic use of language in global organizations was first planted some 16 years ago when I was a doctoral student at Stanford University where I was part of a team examining the cross-cultural experience of global teams at SAP, a German high-tech company. Without prompting, as many as 70 percent of the employees we interviewed in Germany, India, and the US attributed collaboration hardships of one sort or another to language. One of my first interviewees teared up when describing an ongoing feeling of being ostracized as a result of other team members' habitual switch to a foreign language. Others described their difficulty speaking the dominant language, and cited it as the primary source of isolation in their teams and organization. Many saw language differences as the most divisive aspect of their global teamwork. As soon as I left those interviews, I turned to the literature to help make sense of what I had heard. I found very little research that could explain the emotionally-charged and debilitating experiences these employees had recounted—a knowledge gap about one of the most fundamental means of communication for global workers. Since that first study, I have been motivated to go as deep and wide as I could to systematically study, develop interventions, and write about language and the pivotal role it plays in facilitating or inhibiting effective global collaboration.

Q: Your new book tells the story of the Japanese-headquartered tech giant Rakuten, and CEO Hiroshi Mikitani's decision in March 2010 to mandate the use of English company-wide.  What led him to that decision?

Mikitani was often dubbed the Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos of Japan for his prescience in seeing the changes technology would bring to commerce and for his business acumen. By 2010, Rakuten was a household name and Internet destination of choice for the majority of Japanese online shoppers—nearly 90 percent market share for the company domestically. Mikitani felt that the only way Rakuten could grow was to expand globally. Migrating to English would contribute to fast and direct communication—without the cumbersome time delays that translation incurred— and was the only way to integrate his business across multiple nations and insert his company effectively in non-Japanese markets. A common language was the only way to extend knowledge sharing across the organization's existing global operations, as well as those that would be newly and rapidly established in order to efficiently achieve business results. Since transforming into a global organization facilitated by a common language, the company has grown from having some 200 million users to 1.1 billion worldwide in 6 years.

His decision to stipulate a common language is in step with nearly 60 percent of multinational organizations that have migrated officially to English for global work. The pressure to grow globally, as well as the mergers and acquisitions that often cross national and linguistic boundaries, drive organizations to find a common way to communicate. Translators and interpreters for everyday work relationships tend to be inadequate. Meetings between individuals who speak different languages that rely on translators can become cumbersome and unnecessarily lengthy. Likewise, translated documents often lose nuance and slow down transactions. The absence of a lingua franca makes it challenging for linguistically diverse, and usually geographically dispersed, employees to share knowledge and collaborate. It has been long established that global team members who do not share the same language struggle to convey tacit knowledge that will advance their organization's goals. Finally, when subsidiaries are unable to communicate with their headquarters in the same language, the organization can find it difficult and inefficient to communicate a shared mission and values.

Q: I imagine many of Rakuten's native English speakers heard about this decision and immediately thought they were going to have it easy.  Was that the case, or did they face challenges with the transition, too?

The native speakers in several of the US offices were ecstatic at first. My favorite response that encapsulates the sentiment in the US offices is "I've got that box checked." And, indeed, the US employees benefited tremendously from their native language becoming the official language of communication in the company.

But, within two years into the language change, the native English speakers at Rakuten had a very different story to tell. American employees experienced culture shock because they became inundated with Rakuten's corporate culture, which was steeped in Japanese cultural traditions, as well as new demands from the Tokyo headquarters. The language barrier had shielded them from the Tokyo headquarters' frequent demands, but the lingua franca adoption enabled Japanese managers to develop sufficient fluency to translate materials into English that called for substantive changes.

I call this phenomenon the Trojan Horse of Language. Like the enormous wooden horse that the ancient Greeks gifted the city of Troy that hid warriors who opened the city gates to the encroaching Greek army, the "gift" of English that the US employees greeted so ecstatically at the outset in fact carried something more difficult to fathom, namely, a foreign corporate culture. The US employees had thought that the English language mandate would westernize work practices and work values, that is, their native culture, but in reality English transmitted Rakuten's Japanese work practices and values.

Q: You spent half a decade interviewing more than 600 Rakuten employees in eight countries, not to mention collecting survey data from over 3000 employees, and reviewing more than 20,000 pages of materials in the company archives.  What surprised you the most?

I was surprised by the adeptness of the group of employees who were neither members of the HQs nor the US locations. This group worked in the company's foreign offices: Brazil, France, Germany, Indonesia, Taiwan, and Thailand. One might expect that those who had to shed their foundational languages and cultures would have experienced a double jeopardy. This group had the easier linguistic adjustment to English and the easier cultural adjustment to the Japanese ways ushered in by the language mandate, although they too had to master steep learning curves to gain higher language proficiency and engage in new culturally unfamiliar work practices. Once they overcame the frustrations of communicating and coordinating work across borders, they were surprisingly open and receptive to languages and cultural practices that were foreign to their locale, nationality, or identity. These attitudes, in my estimation, makes the employee group most likely to be effective for global organizations of the twenty-first century. I describe their attitude and behaviors in the book as Global Work Orientation.

Q:  We have a number of articles this issue about corporate ecosystems – companies building relationships with other companies to get closer to the market or better serve their customers.  Should sharing a common language be a factor CEOs should consider when evaluating a potential ecosystem partner?

I think it is important to understand if language is important for the critical tasks or the basic work that the organization must do well in order to create distinctive value for stakeholders. For example, to access global markets— and build accessible global brands— dispersed workers must be able to engage with external international partners and customers effectively. A common language makes it easier to synchronize services, helps accelerate the integration of new entities from different regions by helping achieve efficiency in migrating onto common platforms, sharing resources, strengthening internal communication, and fostering cohesion in with partner organization.

Q: What are you researching next?

I continue to tackle some of the many challenges that arise from managing and working in today's global workforce. I am currently focusing on the roles that global leaders play and the strategies they design to meet these challenges.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices