Interview with The BBC Trust Chairman Lord Patten | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with The BBC Trust Chairman Lord Patten

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview

May 13, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Lord Patten, Chairman of the BBC trust, shares insight on quality communication, common sense in emerging markets, ethics in business and revamping executive compensation.

PLAY VIDEO

An Edited Transcript

Chapter 1—“Nerdy, geeky management-speak drives me mad.”

Roger Crockett: Given your vast experience as a leader of boards of directors, what are the relevant skills
necessary to bring about effective leadership on boards?

Lord Patten: I think in order to have a real sense of strategic possibility, and a real vision, you actually have to have
a pretty detailed knowledge of the subject as well. Sometimes people suggest that in order to be the
sort of chairman who sits under the tree and waits for the game to come to you, you don’t really have
to know the detail. I’m not sure about that. I think you really do have to know what’s going on. Now,
you also of course have to have the self-discipline to leave executive decisions, management, micromanagement to those who are employed to do it.

Roger Crockett: You’ve lead organizations in a variety of different arenas, of course at the BBC, but as a
director of Cadbury and of course as Chancellor of the University of Oxford. So do leadership
skills translate from one environment to another, from business to politics?

Lord Patten: I think in whatever sphere you’re in you have to be confident that people will tell you what’s
happening, and tell you things even if they may think you don’t want to know them. I think having
people who will give you the truth rather than what you want to hear is incredibly important. But
across the board I think maybe the most important common ingredient to leadership, is knowing
what you want to do and being able to communicate it in a narrative—to use a very common piece of
political parlance these days—to convey it in a narrative which is both convincing and inspiring, which
both conveys to people very clearly what you want to do and encourages those who are charged
with implementing it to set out and deliver. And the interesting thing is when you look at leadership
of every kind, if you read a book like John Keegan’s Mask of Command about great military leaders
from Alexander the Great to the Duke of Wellington, what was clear about most military leaders was
their ability to explain what they wanted to do very clearly and accurately and get it followed.

Roger Crockett: You’re talking about communication—and you’re very right that very often the ‘troops’ if you
will are reluctant to tell their leader the truth, even if the truth is imperative. So how do you
actually get that out of them when you need to know the facts?

Lord Patten: You have to be clear to those who are working with you that you do want to know what their
opinions are and that you’ll consider their opinions, that you may at the end of the day blind ahead
doing things which they don’t agree with. But at that point they either quit or they are with you.
I do think it’s terribly important to have people who whisper in your ear and tell you what’s really
happening. In Roman triumphs, a general coming back into Rome would have a slave standing
beside him on the chariot saying, ‘Don’t forget you’re only human.’

Roger Crockett: How do you suggest that leaders communicate in this new world, where the digital is as
prevalent as any other form of communication?

Lord Patten: I think it’s terribly important that they use real language. I think that it’s not just true of business, but
it’s particularly true in business. Senior managers can fall into using the sort of language which isn’t
used anywhere outside the boardroom or the executive suite. There’s a sort of nerdish, geekish,
management-speak which obfuscates meaning, and too many chairmen and chief executives talk in
that sort of language, the jargon-laden quality of so many managers. You never have a discussion,
you have an “iterative process,” and it drives me mad.

Chapter 2—Business and Government meet in the Boardroom.

Roger Crockett: Given your background in politics, how important is it for a corporate board to have directors
with experience in politics so that they can interact with government officials effectively?

Lord Patten: It is very difficult to think of many corporate sectors where government isn’t increasingly involved,
where a government doesn’t have either a regulatory role, or where government intervention isn’t
going to have quite an impact on your business. In Europe you’re dealing with that at several levels.
You’re dealing with it at the European level because of the single market and single market regulation,
and you’re dealing it at the national level. So I think that it’s very important to have one or two
people on a board with considerable government experience, at least experience of how government
operates, and with the ability to tell you when you’re paying over the odds for the expertise of so
called ‘experts’ from consultancies or whatever.

Roger Crockett: How active should the chairman or other directors be versus the management team in
interacting with the government?

Lord Patten: I think a good chairman always ensures that his colleagues, as directors, whether non-executive or
executive, are fully in the picture, and feel as though they’re playing a useful and valuable role. I’ve
served with chairmen who do that and I’ve served with chairmen who don’t, and it makes quite a lot
of difference. I served with one chairman during the course of a long and not very happy take-over
battle, and he was brilliant at keeping the board informed of every twist and turn, and actually doing it
through text messages as well as longer reports.

Chapter 3—“Let common sense prevail.” Success in China and India.

Roger Crockett: Drawing from your experience in Asia, what is different about leading in an emerging market
versus leading in developed markets, like the US or Europe?

Lord Patten: I know about China and I know about India. China has over the centuries attracted wild expectation,
which has sometimes encouraged otherwise perfectly sensible business leaders to leave their prudence
and common sense in the airport terminal when they get on the plane to Beijing or Shanghai. There’s
a library of books about business opportunities which have been screwed up in China because of a
lack of the sort of corporate prudence which people would demonstrate in any other market. In some
respects the best of all was written by a political scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
called Lucian Pye, who wrote a wonderful book on Chinese negotiating.

The main lesson of all is, don’t be seduced by the sheer size of the market. Of course, there are
fantastic business opportunities in China, but don’t be silly about it and don’t be less prudent in going
into China than you’d be in going into Brazil or India or a European market. You’ll find an awful lot
of people who have managed to lose a large amount of money in China by neglecting that advice. I
repeat, I’m not saying that you shouldn’t be in China but you need, I think, to be pretty cautious about
how you do it, and to find good Chinese interlocutors or good Chinese members of a board—not easy,
not remotely easy, but they are out there.

Roger Crockett: When a country is preparing to enter India or China for example, is it important for the chair to
advise management that maybe we need to make sure we have the appropriate representation
from those countries?

Lord Patten: It’s very different to operate in India or China, and the beginning of wisdom I think is not to think there
is a country called ‘Chindia.’ I think Hong Kong and corporate Hong Kong are different from mainland
China and India is very different from both of them. India has probably been more successful than
China in developing big multi-national corporations, benchmarking in sectors from pharmaceuticals and
to business services to IT, to telecommunications to motor manufacturer. There are differences within
India. Increasingly, I think it’s wrong to think of India, if you are setting up a factory for example, as one
commercial, economic space. Different parts of India are run very differently. The policy has become
federalized in a sense, so a state like Gujarat, which only has probably 5% of India’s population, has 15
to 16% of India’s output, and 22% of India’s exports. If you’re setting up a factory you’ll try, I imagine,
to go to a part of the country where the communications are better, where the electricity supply is more
dependable, where attitudes to labor market regulation are more sensible. Those are decisions which
would lead you in one direction rather than another in India. I don’t think it’s quite the same in China
where things would be more similar right across the board.

Chapter 4—Where did business ethics go? Re-establishing trust.

Roger Crockett: Absolutely. Sometimes in their determination to excel, some businesses lose hold of their
sense of ethics. What is the role of the chairman and the board in helping to rein in a company
when it goes astray?

Lord Patten: I think it’s in a way comparable to politics. I think you should always ask yourself whether you’d
be happy if this or that decision, if this or that business practice, was on the front of tomorrow’s
newspaper. It doesn’t seem to me that it’s a bad test to apply. And I think on the whole, bad business
ethics is bad for business.

Now, there are lots of different ways you can look at that, but if you think about supply chain issues,
we know that customers are increasingly concerned themselves about those sorts of matters—
whether things have been made according to reasonable health and safety standards, whether they’ve
taken account of the role of children in the manufacturing process. Information is now conveyed much
more rapidly on those issues, through Facebook and Twitter and YouTube and so on. So, I think it’s
really important for a business to be really hot on safeguarding the way it works. To talk about ethics
in the boardroom is not to be undermining the principle role of the business. Trust is something which
is being fractured in most of our democracies, in Europe and America, over the last few years. Trust
in banks and financial services by the financial crash for example, and it’s terribly important to the
success of capitalism that it’s re-established.

Roger Crockett: Of course, one of the more famous, or infamous ethical breaches recently has been the
News Corporation News of the World phone hacking scandal. Can you tell us any lessons in
leadership that that example brings to light?

Lord Patten: It’s plainly very important that the most senior management should know what’s going on right
through the business, and should be able to trust what they are told. There is a particular issue
involving the media, which certainly with the written media, is self-regulating in this country. If you
regard your role, and I think it’s reasonable to do so, as being to have the freedom to hold others to
account, the rest of society has to feel that you can be held to account as well. Now, we have to find
ways, and this is the beginning of the process I think in this country, in which we can do that without
the state getting involved. But freedom of speech and the belief in freedom of speech doesn’t mean
the license to do whatever you want. That’s a lesson for all of us.

Roger Crockett: I would agree with you. What about the role of the board in cases like this? What sort of regulatory
role do they have in keeping the management and the rest of the organization on its toes?

Lord Patten: Well the board is ultimately responsible, not just ultimately responsible, you can’t I think say as
justification ‘We didn’t know what was going on,’ or ‘Oh, we were told that everything was fine and we
believed it.’ You’ve got to ask some tough questions.

Roger Crockett: Does the board’s processes, behavior, procedures that govern how it interacts within the
company, does that have to change? Should that be updated, just generally speaking?

Lord Patten: What I think is very difficult on a board is to have people there with the self-confidence to ask common
sense questions, and to in particular, question things they don’t understand. How can you sit on a board
and be told that millions has been made out of a process which you don’t understand? You find yourself
almost immediately, in every sector, in a world of acronyms and a vocabulary which you’ve never heard
before. So self-confidence [is required] in just being sensible and intelligent about what you’re doing.

Chapter 5—“Put an awkward devil on the remuneration committee.”

Roger Crockett: Well of course as Chairman of the BBC you’ve been rather vocal about remuneration. How
should a board establish the right tone and the right standards around executive pay?

Lord Patten: First of all, in my judgment, issues of social equity are going to be increasingly important in America
and Europe, maybe elsewhere too over the next few years, as we cope with lower economic growth
rates, which we will be doing. So distributive issues will become, I think, increasingly important
politically and we’d better face up to that.

Secondly, I think we’ve lost our sense of seemliness of what’s appropriate in many of our societies,
and I think that’s hugely damaging. It’s not least damaging to all the arguments about the moral basis
of capitalism. I think there are a lot of people who are strong supporters of the market who would
look at what’s happened in the last few years, at the growing gulf between medium earnings and
top earnings, and question what the justification for that was. So I really do think that the relationship
between top pay and medium pay is worryingly high.

In the case of the BBC, the BBC is very widely trusted as a great broadcaster, particularly because of
the programs that it makes. It wasn’t, in my judgment, as trusted an institution as it should have been.
And that was partly because of the levels of pay which people were being paid—good people, but the
working in a public service ethos and wanting to be paid like bankers, is simply not on. So, I got them
to accept three things: First of all, that we would cap top executive pay to medium earnings and that
we would gradually reduce the cap for the executive board as a whole to medium earnings at about
nine to one, and we are going to see that come down. Secondly, I do not believe that you should treat
some people who work for a company as goats and others as cattle. So I was concerned that senior
managers were getting things like private health insurance, which other people weren’t getting, and
gradually we are going to phase that out. Thirdly, and this is more of a public service/public sector
issue rather than a private sector issue, the number of people who qualified in the group as senior
executives and senior managers, I thought was absurdly high. It was about three and a half percent
of the workforce as a whole. So we have a program for reducing that to about one percent. In some
cases it doesn’t mean getting rid of someone but it means actually changing the nature of their job.
So a real reduction in the number of senior executives, a realist attempt to ensure that people are
treated in the same way. That is true in the private sector as well, eating in the same canteens and
so on. And thirdly, which Japanese companies would take for granted, thirdly I think capping top pay
again. If you look at the comparisons of senior paid and medium earnings, a very different picture in
Japan, a very different picture in some parts of continental Europe than in the United Kingdom or the
United States. And I think my own judgment is that political pressures, using a small “p” for political,
are going to push everybody in that direction over the next few years.

Roger Crockett: So Chris, what about the board’s role, what role does the board play to make sure the pay is
equitable?

Lord Patten: I think it’s very important to have at least one non-executive on remuneration committees who’s an
awkward devil, and doesn’t simply take whatever the consultant’s report says about comparators.
Someone who’s prepared to ask awkward questions about pension pots and share option schemes
and overall levels of remuneration. I think that’s hugely in the interests of any board. It takes quite a lot
of guts and self-confidence to do it, but I think it’s an extremely important role, just as it’s important
for an audit committee to have somebody, or more than one person, who can actually read a balance
sheet like a hawk from 5,000 feet.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices