The New CEO | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The New CEO

Lessons from CEOs on How to Start Well and Perform Quickly (Minus the Common Mistakes)- A book by Ty Wiggins

ORDER YOUR COPY NOW

Start reading
Order Now
Partner with us
Speak to Ty About your Transition

How do world-leading CEOs approach their first year in the job?

What did they do first? What do they wish they’d done differently? And what advice do they have for the next generation of CEOs?

In The New CEO, RRA leadership advisor Ty Wiggins and his contributing partners offer a backstage pass to nailing your first year as CEO—whether it’s your first, second, or third time in the role.

Based on original research and candid conversations with CEOs from Verizon, PepsiCo, Campbell’s, UPS, Whirlpool, and more, Ty sets out how to start well and perform quickly as a new CEO. Discover their successes, their missteps, and the important lessons they learned along the way.

A must-read peek into the most coveted role in business. Perfect for first-time CEOs and seasoned ones, as well as those who work with them.

ORDER YOUR COPY NOW

Book contributors

Justus O’Brien

Laura Sanderson

Margot McShane

Rusty O’Kelley

Stephen Langton

What you’ll find in this book

The New CEO lifts the veil on essential CEO transition milestones, including how to:

ORDER YOUR COPY NOW

The New CEO Workbook

A Practical Guide for CEOs to Start Well and Perform Quickly - Created by Ty Wiggins

Download the New Workbook

Praise for The New CEO

A must-read, packed with real-world wisdom from leading CEOs and backed by in-depth research. This isn’t just another leadership book; it’s a lifeline for new CEOs, offering concrete strategies for a successful start. From setting priorities and dealing with crisis to building your team and engaging your board—this book covers it. A great gift for any new CEO.”

Hubert Joly
Former Best Buy CEO, senior lecturer Harvard Business School, and Author, The Heart of Business

In a fast-moving world, having a practical, pragmatic, and purposeful approach for stepping into the CEO role is more important than ever. In The New CEO, Ty provides just the right blend of strategic and tactical counsel to accelerate your CEO transition for sustainable success. A must-read for seasoned and next-generation CEOs.”

Alex Gorsky
Board member of Apple and IBM, and former Chairman and CEO of Johnson & Johnson

Ty Wiggins has made it his career to help new CEOs deliver a strong start. He distills his rich experience in this trusted step-by-step guide that will help you tackle the issues you face during your transition. This is a critical book for all new CEOs—and those who work with them—and it could not have come at a more important time.”

Nancy McKinstry
CEO and Chairman of the Executive Board, Wolters Kluwer

Having Ty as my advisor was one of the most valuable assets I had in navigating my first year as a CEO. Now even more leaders can benefit from his expertise. Every new CEO faces different challenges—but the advice, anecdotes, and research in this book will help any new corporate leader lay the groundwork for their long-term success.”

Katie Koch
President and CEO, The TCW Group

For all the attention on new CEOs, there is little objective guidance on how to nail your first 12 months in office. The New CEO offers a clear path forward. Blending in-depth research and powerful stories, Ty offers a critical guide on how to win as a new CEO— and deliver standout results for you and your organization.”

Oscar Munoz
Board member of Salesforce, former CEO and Chairman of United Airlines, and Author, Turnaround Time

Who should read this book?

Perfect for first-time CEOs and veteran CEOs across industries and ownerships, including PE and family-owned offices, The New CEO also earns a place in the libraries of C-suite executives, aspiring CEOs, and anyone who regularly works with CEOs.

• Board members  • C-suite executives  • In-house counsel  • Consultants and advisors  • Founders / Entrepreneurs  • Aspiring CEOs

About the author

Ty Wiggins is a leadership expert who is passionate about setting up new CEOs for success.

As the lead of Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO & Transitions Practice globally, he helps world-leading CEOs successfully transition into their roles, to unlock business (and personal) success—faster.

Ty is one of only a handful of people globally with a Ph.D. in leadership transitions.

He harnesses his deep academic and consulting background to provide CEOs, boards, and senior leadership across industries with the advice, support, and insight needed to start well and perform quickly.

Get in touch with Ty

CEO Transitions

Defining Success in the First 12 Months.An original research study with 200+ CEOs globally

Read the full research

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices