Stepping up to the Leadership Challenge: Q&A with Per Wold-Olsen | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Stepping up to the Leadership Challenge: Q&A with Per Wold-Olsen

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHealthcareHuman Resources OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

Dana Krueger

May 26, 2020

7 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHealthcareHuman Resources OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Healthcare Leading Forward Podcast Series:

On and Beyond the Frontlines of Covid-19

Close

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

Per Wold-Olsen is Chairman of the Board for GN Store Nord A/S, a hearing aid and headset maker, as well as Oncopeptides AB, a pharmaceutical company focused on targeted cancer therapies. He has been a member of the Gilead Sciences Board of Directors since 2010, and acts as Chair of the Advisory Group of Novo Holdings. He is also Chair of the Board of the Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV), a not-for-profit initiative dedicated to the discovery, development and delivery of medicines for the treatment of malaria. Previously, he served as President of the Human Health Intercontinental Division of Merck & Co.

Recently, Per spoke with Dana Krueger, Managing Director and Global Healthcare Sector Leader, and Alessandra Abate, Managing Director and Leader of the Global Biotech and Pharmaceuticals Practice at Russell Reynolds Associates. Per shared his insights on what leaders are doing well and what they must do next to emerge from the crisis stronger than ever.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

Alessandra Abate: Per, you're well known as a global leader in healthcare across all its verticals, and you have a view across the entire ecosystem. Are there any key trends that you are observing in how leaders are responding to the current COVID-19 crisis?

Per Wold-Olsen: One of the key trends that I see with all the companies I am involved with is CEOs stepping up to the challenge. True leaders start to shine in a time of crisis, and I have to say I have been so impressed. Different CEOs have stepped up to distinctively different challenges from one company to another.

Dana Krueger: What leadership qualities are really starting to shine across all these situations?

Per Wold-Olsen: The one common thing is what Colin Powell said: “Take care of your troops.” This is not the time to be overly concerned about shareholders, it's the time to be overly concerned about your employment base and making sure that your leadership team stays focused on doing the right things.

Alessandra Abate: You oversee very different verticals. There’s GN, with a focus on medical devices; Oncopeptides, which is a company on the verge of its first global launch, and Gilead, very involved in the crisis. Are you seeing any differences in how these companies are dealing with the crisis?

Per Wold-Olsen: Indeed. If you look at biotech and big pharma companies, to some extent, their revenue base is hardly impacted at all. For the medical technology sector right now, it’s all about figuring out how you can cut costs or defer costs. In many of the companies we see voluntary salary reductions, significant impacts on bonus payouts and so on. And for a startup, you're totally dependent on being able to get your patients through the clinical trials. If you have significant delay, that could potentially end up being a serious headache for you. That said, we were surprised and delighted to see that there is high interest in funding biotech startups in these challenging times when we needed to raise money for Oncopeptides this spring.

Alessandra Abate: Given the variety of situations, how have you changed the way you are advising CEOs now?

Per Wold-Olsen: I'm so impressed with their ability to step up and show true leadership, I've actually been less hands-on during this time period than what is normally the case. But what I keep reminding CEOs and leadership is this: “This is not your fault. This is something that you could not have seen, society did not see it. So, you shouldn't feel bad about it. You should stay focused on doing the right things and be clear about the actions you need to take.” In case of Gilead Sciences, it’s how do you get Remdesivir to the markets swiftly. In case of GN Store Nord, it's all about how do we cut costs in the most smart, elegant and professional way possible. We don't know when the virus will be behind us, and we can do scenario planning left right and center. I basically say, “Stop. We don’t need to speculate. Let's do the right things that we need to do now. And let's focus on how we come back stronger than ever.”

Dana Krueger: Per, you've been involved in developing medicines for malaria as well. Are there leadership lessons from that part of your experience base that you think are salient or transferable into the current global health crisis?

Per Wold-Olsen: Yes and no. The significant topic for us, on top of all the regular virus issues, is how to secure continuity of supplies of malaria medicines for Africa. We have spent so much quality time interacting and working with the Global Fund, the WHO, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to make sure we preserve the necessary supply of malaria drugs for Africa if the Western part of the world ends up believing in and starting to significantly use the same medicines to treat COVID-19. And I am pleased to say we've been able to ensure that we will have medicines for the people of Africa, no matter what happens in the Western world.

Dana Krueger: As you think about how you advise future CEOs or even choose future CEOs, do you believe that there is a need for different competencies in those individuals? Will you be looking for something different for CEOs post-virus?

Per Wold-Olsen: I am privileged to be the Chairman of GN Store Nord, a Denmark-based company producing hearing aids and headsets. Today, the company is at the forefront of technology, as over the last six or seven years it has transformed from a hardware company to a software company. However, fundamentally, pharma and biotech today are not at the forefront of using modern technology in the digital space. So, being digitally savvy is one of the competencies I will be looking for.

It is also about being visionary. I will be looking for the visionary CEOs who understand that the world is on a journey, and that the pace of that journey will accelerate, big time. There is no question that tomorrow we will operate in a distinctively different way compared to the way we operated in 2019. Going back to the example of GN Store Nord. While the sales of hearing aids went down dramatically in the second quarter of this year, we can hardly serve the demand for headsets. This is because the company became a strong player in the enterprise space, anticipating that the usage of the medium will go far beyond the current usage.

It is also about understanding of changes in healthcare delivery. The health care system has been set up so that you have to meet in person. In Europe, if the doctor doesn't see you in person, s/he will not be paid or reimbursed. In tomorrow's healthcare environment, virtual consultations between the patient, or the patient and the family, and the doctor, would be rather a norm than the exception. It won't be the norm in 2021, but already governments and payers will pay for online consultations, which was unheard of in 2018. My son is a clinical physiologist who specializes in dealing with Parkinson’s patients. The trick here is to intervene early, so they have been fighting for reimbursement of online sessions for the last three years. Once the virus hit, it took only three months to get reimbursement for virtual interventions .

That tells you what impact the virus will have on the healthcare system. The major changes will be about re-prioritization, speed and revision of traditional operating models.

Alessandra Abate: We want to thank you, Per, on behalf of the team for taking the time, sharing your thoughts with us and for being so inspirational.

Per Wold-Olsen: It has been my pleasure to speak with you.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices