Interview with Board Member of BMW Group Peter Schwarzenbauer| Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Board Member of BMW Group Peter Schwarzenbauer

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 15, 2022

6 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Peter Schwarzenbauer talks about digital transformation, navigating culture changes and the
company of the future.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

Chapter 1: Digital Transformation

Walter Friederichs: Hi Peter, you are a member of the management board of BMW
Group. Thanks for coming here. We’re very interested in learning about your
responsibility.

Peter Schwarzenbauer: I would like to start by saying that I have probably the best job in
the car industry and I mean it because the scope is so big and so interesting

Our long-term strategic goal is, you know, to become the most successful, premium
individual mobility provider and not only cars. This is where opened i-Ventures in New
York, i-Ventures gives us now the possibility to invest in small startups operating in the
area of mobility. Just to give you a little bit of overview of how dynamic experience. We
screened over 800 startups in the last two years, all related to mobility and we’ve invested
in about seven so far and this is an area which gives us access to start up, seeing very
fast in this area and combining it what we can bring to the table.

Walter Friederichs: So that is all around the aspect of mobility solutions then. Is that just
in the US or is it on a global scale?

Peter Schwarzenbauer: It’s on a global scale when we look in to the startups, of course,
one of the key measurements is is it scalable? Is it possible to have it implemented
internationally and does it have an economic future? Then of course it has to add to
supplement basically what we are offering already in our cars. Let me give you just one
example.

Park now is one of the area where we are investing heavily, everything that can help a
consumer in the future to find easily a parking space, we are trying to invest in this and I
give you a reason why we are doing this. If you look at major cities around the world,
especially on a typical Saturday afternoon when people go shopping, 30 per cent of traffic
in a city is looking for a parking space. So can you imagine what we could change on the
mobility area if we could find much smarter solutions than just driving around to looking
for a free space? We have first pilot projects in San Francisco running, we will implement
something later on also in Europe and we are cooperating also with big parking houses.

Walter Friederichs: Why does BMW actually invest in such startups rather than just
cooperating with them?

Peter Schwarzenbauer: The possibility of investing in the startup companies give us also
the possibility to work closer with them, because for us it is a strategic investment, now
we want to be part of the development and not just like a normal venturing company.

So our strategic goal is more to develop companies which in the future offers for our
customers, so that we have even a better way of providing mobility. Now we are not only
giving money to start companies we are also offering them the whole package I mean
how to develop a business plan. How to develop your marketing plan? We see a lot of
young people in this start up scheme, they have great ideas, great expectations, but
sometimes, of course, they miss the basics in business. So I’m putting this together, I
think it’s the best way of moving forward.

Chapter 2: Navigating Culture Changes

Walter Friederichs: What are the major challenges in moving in that direction?

Peter Schwarzenbauer: The major challenge, I think, is a more cultural issue. I mean
imagine just now BMW Group extremely well structured, perfect processes, the German
mentality shines through in every aspect and then you have the startup scheme now. You
know, totally chaotic, no processes, no structure whatsoever, but huge ideas, gut feeling.
Energy, they are ready to take risks. So I think for us, and for me personally, it’s a little bit
like a new art of bringing these two extremes together, I think both sides can benefit
heavily.

Walter Friederichs: Does it tell you something about the talent requirements for
conducting your business in the future?

Peter Schwarzenbauer: Definitely, I mean I learn a lot every day to be very honest,
discussing the startup schemes because I’m totally convinced that we need more of this
profile, of this talent, also in our companies. They are people, they are ready to take some
risks and they don’t fear of failing because this is something you need to have. If you want
to step forward, if you want to get an extra mile, if you want to be open minded, you
cannot have fear of failing. If this is the case get out of the startups, you’re doing not so
well. So this is an attitude I find in many of these entrepreneurs which I would love to see
more in big corporations.

Walter Friederichs: So when you’re integrating this kind clear qualifications, do you have
ideas how you actually get to align the two different worlds internally to a corporate,
externally in a startup, but internally to BMW?

Peter Schwarzenbauer: I personally like this cultural shock. I think it’s quite an
interesting situation that we are facing now. But honestly this will take time, I mean
cultural change in the company normally three to five years, so I’m convinced that we will
need some time where there are some hurdles you have to take on the way, but we
started, we embarked in this way and I think this is extremely good for the culture, on one
side for the BMW Group, but also I can see that the startups are learning a lot from us.

Chapter 3: Company of the Future

Walter Friederichs: How would you describe the ideal company to look in the future?

Peter Schwarzenbauer: If I would describe it, I would like to have a mix between the
perfect, organised, well-structured company like BMW and on the other hand, this start up
scheme, being really inventive, thinking out of the box approach. So if I combine this, I
am envisioning a company, high speed, high profit, and high relevance. I think that high
speed, to be always ahead of the game, it’s very important. High profits, this gives us the
possibility to continuously invest in new technology with this in the future of the company
and high relevance because I’m totally convinced that it’s not enough for a company like
BMW just to offer beautiful cars, great motorcycles. I think we have to have a certain
relevance within society to be accepted overall. So these other three terms I would love
to see in my ideal company.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices