The Role of Digital Directors in Industrial Transformation | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

The Role of Digital Directors in Industrial Transformation

The Role of Digital Directors in Industrial Transformation

Technology and InnovationLeadershipIndustrialBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Interview

+ 1 author

April 26, 2017

5 min min

Technology and InnovationLeadershipIndustrialBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Listen to our Podcast to learn more about the senior talent implications of digital directors.

Close

David Finke

Palo Alto

Sarah Galloway

London

James Roome

London

Jens-Thomas Pietralla

Munich

To learn more, listen to our Podcast on Industrial Internet where Susanne Suhonen, Global Knowledge Leader, interviews David Finke, leader of Russell Reynolds’ Technology Sector and Jens-Thomas Pietralla, leader of the firm’s Industrial Sector on their views on senior talent implications.

Have industrial boards become more digitally savvy?

The disruption brought about by the Industrial Internet and the Internet of Things (IoT) means that industrial companies are faced with significant business model, organizational, and talent management challenges. Unsurprisingly, over the past two years CEOs have appointed Chief Digital Officers to help them lead the transformation and navigate many of the organizational and cultural complexities that accompany their digital journeys. While the importance of this C-level position is clear, non-executive leadership also plays an important role when it comes to the strategy, investments and risks related to industrial companies’ digital transformations.

We continue to hear from boards, chairs and CEOs that having the right person in the boardroom – asking the right questions and challenging management – is a powerful catalyst for change. Our advice to clients is that traditional industrial goods businesses should ensure the participation of at least one supervisory board member with an executive background in digital to help build a bridge for the rest of the board.

We analyzed the boards of 50 of the global leading industrial manufacturing companies to understand the extent to which new digital directors have been appointed in the past two years. In total, these leading global industrial companies had 539 board directors as of March 2017. 102 new directors have either been appointed or announced since January 2015; of these, only eleven meet our definition of a digital director. This is low given the need for digital transformation in the industry.

At the same time, it is important to recognize that boards have a limited number of seats and that director appointments must often cover several areas of expertise, where digital merits may be just one of the requirements. Also, boards ideally need a blend of digital experience, and every board member has a role to play in transforming the business. Finally, finding and appointing digital directors to industrial boards can be challenging, as the demand currently exceeds the supply of qualified and experienced candidates.

New board director appointments and announcements at 50 of the global leading industrial manufacturing companies, January 2015 – March 2017

Definition of “digital director” in the context of industrial manufacturing

Senior executive of a tech company/telco

Senior executive with digital operating experience in a traditional, non web-based company

Senior executive at a digital web-based company

Senior partner at a digital/IT consultancy

To qualify as a “digital director”, executive experience in at least one of the above areas must be relatively recent (2007 onwards).

How can digital directors add value?

As a prerequisite, digital directors must bring general management weight. On top of that, their individual digital experience can help shape the vision, strategy and business model in unique ways. There are four areas where digital directors are typically asked to add value to the boards on which they serve. They can help set the scope of the digital strategy, design the framework that supports leadership and shapes culture, advise on data and analytics and build new partnerships, and help determine the right level of investment needed to implement it.

The digital director also adds value by challenging the board dynamic. Digital directors bring fresh thinking to the board, questioning the status quo, while helping to maintain a sense of proportion about the potential of digital.

Examples of recent appointments to industrial boards

Examples of recent appointments to industrial boards from January 2015-March 2017 or announcements of upcoming appointments.

Our advice - considerations for board chairs

One solution to the shortage of suitable digital directors is the creation of a digital advisory board. This is an effective way to gain insight from multiple individuals with a wide range of relevant expertise. It is important to ensure that a digital advisory board has the right charter and composition to address the full range of digital and technology governance and risk management issues.

In addition to digital directors, some industrial companies have begun appointing Qualified Technology Executives (QTE) to their boards. A QTE’s role on the board of directors is to give vital input on key technology decisions that require board-level attention, ask the right questions and provide appropriate perspective, as well as mentor leaders of the technology functions (CIO, CTO, CISO). Our 2016 study, The Rise of the Qualified Technology Executive in the Boardroom, found that 26% of the Fortune 500 industrial and natural resources companies already had a QTE on their board.

Today, individuals with deep digital experience are in very high demand, working in demanding executive digital transformation roles. Therefore, it is important to be realistic about how much time they can devote to board activities versus their day-to-day executive work.

Considerations for digital experts looking to join an industrial board

Digital experts considering to join an industrial company board should clarify how their participation will create impact on the board and for the company undergoing digital transformation. Therefore, key questions to ask include:

What is the board’s commitment to digital and the required transformation?

What is the CEO’s commitment to digital?

Who owns the digital agenda in the company?

How digital is the company’s offering?

Has the company innovated on its business model?

Additional authors

Susanne Suhonen is a Global Knowledge Leader based in London
Natasha Treschow is a Knowledge Associate based in London

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices