Interview with Columbia Business School professor Wei Jiang.

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

A Long-Term Perspective on Activists

A Long-Term Perspective on Activists

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersBoard Effectiveness

Interview

December 12, 2018

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryLegal, Risk, and Compliance OfficersBoard Effectiveness

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Shareholder activism is on the rise, but what it means for CEOs and boards is changing.

Close

We talked to Columbia Business School professor Wei Jiang, who has tracked activists for the past decade, about activists' new strategies and how executives and directors should respond.

2018 was an intense year for activist investors. With Elliott Management, Starboard Value and GAMCO Investors leading the way, activist investors had targeted 174 companies and secured 130 board seats by the end of the third quarter, easily surpassing 2017’s full-year tallies and on track to break records from previous years, according to research compiled by Lazard.1

For CEOs and board members, this unsettling reality raises new questions about how best to react – and even prepare in advance for – activist overtures. Boards can often create a defense strategy before activists knock at their door by proactively assessing themselves with the five filters activists typically look at to determine their targets (see Russell Reynolds Associates’ paper on this topic, Clear Eyes Provide Boards with Better Vision).2

In the big picture, however, activists are increasingly speaking for other large investors, and winning concessions through persuasion rather than force, according to Wei Jiang, the Arthur F. Burns Professor of Free and Competitive Enterprise at Columbia Business School. Professor Jiang first began studying activist investors in 2003, back when just a handful of firms qualified for the label, and when the prime venue for the activity was to open up deeply discounted closed-end funds. With co-authors Alon Brav, Randall S. Thomas and Frank Partnoy, she published a landmark study in 2008 documenting the strategies of activist firms and what they meant for companies in the firms’ cross-hairs. As shareholder activism has taken off in the years since, Jiang has continued to track how activists affect CEOs, boards, company performance, and corporate controls via either takeovers or proxy contests.

We spoke with Professor Jiang to learn more about how what drives today’s activist investors and what options CEOs and boards have when it comes to working with them.

What makes a company a ripe target for an activist - and how has that changed over the time you've studied this topic?

One of the biggest changes is in company size. Before the financial crisis, very large cap companies were usually not targeted. The model was that an activist would hold 5 to 10 percent of medium-sized companies. Now, no range of market cap will make you immune from becoming a target of activists. Investors including Icahn, Trian Capital and Elliott will hold just 2 or 3 percent and are able to have a big voice in a giant corporation.

There is also much more activism around M&A, or control changes, which is relatively new. In these cases, activists often want to redraw the boundaries of the firm.

Some of the other factors have not changed, however. The stock return, relative to peers, is still probably the strongest predictor of being a target. If one company significantly lags industry peers for two years, they are a very obvious target. Another is when management repeatedly misses forecasts or doesn’t deliver what they promised investors. One other clear factor in this operational category is when a company has assets in different segments with disparate growth potentials and profit margins but without clear synergies.

Besides operational issues, a second class of issues that attract activists are driven by financial policies, such as holding too much cash. The third category of activist activity involves governance issues, usually related to board members with extraordinarily long tenures who may be too “friendly” with the managers.

What typically happens to the CEO and the board after an activist intervention?

When any activist campaign starts, CEO turnover about doubles. Normal CEO turnover is about 12 percent per year; if an activist knocks on your door, about one-quarter of the CEOs will experience turnover in the coming year, and turnover will remain higher than normal for another two years.

When it comes to board seats, on average there will be one to two new people added to the board, but it’s not necessarily “My people replace your people.” If you look at the whole sample, it’s a net addition of one director.

The challenge to the whole board is how to internalize that new addition. They’re clearly coming from a different camp, but now they’re one board and share the same fiduciary duties, and answer to the same shareholders. That is the main challenge they face. And most of those board members, particularly those who come through settlement, do win support in future years, so these are not just two- or three- year board members.

Your research shows that about half of the announced proxy contest went into settlements during the last 10 years, and that number seems to be rising, based on recent years. Looking at these trends, do you think CEO's and Boards are making the right choices for their companies?

Many times, it’s not really a choice. We have a new work that looks at how institutional investors vote in proxy contests and how firms and activists (and their advisors) can potentially calibrate support levels: You look at who your shareholders are and how they voted on past similar contests, and estimate how they are likely to vote in yours. We find settlements are more likely when anticipated support for the activist is higher. It’s analogous to settling a lawsuit vs going to trial. If management feels the other side has a decent probability of winning, and they have more to lose, settlement is the wise thing to do.

Also, the law is asymmetric. If the company goes to proxy battle and loses, the CEO and some directors will almost certainly lose their jobs. If the activist loses, though a serious dent, they still manage their funds and they go for their next target. And sometimes they still get what they want. Dupont won the proxy context against Trian, for example, but in the end they did most of what Trian asked them to do.

So how should CEO's and boards handle an activist critique of their company?

Often times there is a contest because there are different visions – but the first step is for the management to acknowledge that everyone at the table wishes the firm well. Building a basic sentiment of alignment is important. The arguments you hear all the time – that one vision is short-termist and one vision is long – do not go well today.

Management has to realize that even though activists might hold 5 percent of the firm, they’re not just talking about their 5 percent, which wouldn’t carry the vote in any case. They are presenting these alternative versions for the firm’s future because they feel they have the large institutional investors – the Fidelitys and Black Rocks of the world – behind them. When [an activist] comes to this stage, they have done their homework as to what extent these large institutional investors will support them. BlackRock is the epitome of long term investment, but in our sample of votes over the last 10 years or so, Black Rock supported dissidents in proxy contests over 40% of the time.

The CEO needs to realize the pivotal voters are the large institutional voters and you need to convince them. If company truly feels the activists are wrong, they have to better communicate their vision. But everyone at the table wants the valuation to go up, so don’t focus on the motive issue.

Your research has documented some surprisingly positive effects for companies when activists get involved. What exactly happens to stock prices when activists get involved?

Overall, we discovered a 5 to 6 percent announcement-period stock price pop. Afterwards, in the longer term, it becomes a random walk, which means markets neither under-react or over-react. My co-authors and I have a couple of papers that show a very coherent message in that value appreciation usually comes from asset reallocation: the companies trim down non-productive projects, stop bad acquisitions, and sell off underperforming assets. When we look at the technology space, if they have a portfolio of patents, we find after the campaign they really focus on their key technology class and sell off some peripheral segments.

To some extent, the firms retreat to their core competencies. The other thing is that in any firm that has multiple segments, you tend to have good ones subsidize bad ones. When that is stopped, the healthiest parts of the firm can grow without encumbrance, and the weaker ones can be rematched to more suitable owners.

Are there any examples of an activism in the news this year that you think are particularly interesting, or illustrative of the trends you find in your research?

I have to say, I was so struck by how slim the winning margin in some recent contests. In Dupont, the winning margin was between 2 and 3 percent, for P&G, it was .02 percent – which meant about 1000 investors could have been pivotal. To some extent, it shows in most cases, people figure out who has the better version of the company and avoid going into the contests. When both sides stick to their guns and go to proxy battle, it means both sides really have merits.

For management, the challenge is for them to articulate better why what they have in mind is better for the firm and how – in a very targeted way -- investors’ concerns could be addressed in their version. They can’t just accuse the activists of being short-termists because it is not obvious how anyone can pull out a short-term gain by tanking the long-term perspective.

1 Lazard’s Review of Shareholder Activism - Q3 2018

2 Jack “Rusty” O’Kelley III, Clear Eyes Provide Boards With Better Vision

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices