The Business of New Ideas: A Conversation With Corporate Creativity Expert Luc de Brabandere | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

The Business of New Ideas: A Conversation With Corporate Creativity Expert Luc de Brabandere

The Business of New Ideas: A Conversation With Corporate Creativity Expert Luc de Brabandere

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

Interview

October 18, 2019

7 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationBoard and CEO AdvisoryExecutive Search

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Explore what it takes to inspire and nurture corporate creativity—and why passion is so essential.

Close

When it comes to accomplishing major career objectives, corporate creativity expert Luc de Brabandere has checked many boxes. Once CEO of the Brussels Stock Exchange, he left the world of finance to study philosophy for nine years, then joined strategy consulting firm Boston Consulting Group (BCG) to help companies reimagine their futures. During his decade as a BCG partner, he co-authored two well-known books, The Forgotten Half of Change: Achieving Greater Creativity Through Changes in Perception (Dearborn Trade Publishing, 2005) and Thinking in New Boxes: A New Paradigm for Business Creativity (Random House, 2013).

Now a BCG Fellow as well as president of creative agency Cartoonbase and a lecturer at several universities including the Louvain School of Management and the Solvay Brussels School of Economics and Management, CentraleSupélec and ETH Zurich, the 71-year-old de Brabandere recently spoke with Russell Reynolds Associates Journal writer Alix Stuart about what it takes to inspire and nurture corporate creativity—and why passion is so essential.

Q: How did you get interested in the study of creative thinking?

Luc de Brabandere: My background is engineering; I studied applied mathematics. At its core, it is the art of the model: In fluid dynamics, for example, how can you translate a river into equations? That’s my passion. I had another passion—cartoons. One day I realized the two passions were the same. Consider a caricature, when you do a cartoon with four or five lines—nearly nothing—and you recognize someone. When you take gravity and you produce Newton’s equation, it’s nothing that gives you a lot. The art is the same for a caricature and a mathematical model: It is about how to give the most using the least.

When I was 40, I had the privilege of turning my passion into a profession. I left my finance job to focus on mental models, studying philosophy for nine years. Managers sometimes have difficulties in coping with topics like creativity, ethics or corporate image since there are no numbers available. Philosophy is a toolbox that helps one to become rigorous even if you don’t have measures. I wrote some books on creative thinking, but did not want to work alone, so I approached BCG with a proposal to help their partners and their clients develop and stimulate their creative thinking. I was a partner there for more than 10 years doing exactly that.

Q: What is the most common misconception about your work?

Luc de Brabandere:  The most frequent confusion is between creativity and innovation. Innovation is about changing the world; creativity is about changing the perception you have of the world. Newton didn’t change the solar system, he changed the way we looked at it. Of course, businesses need both, but people always focus on “How are we going to change the world?” and you have to focus on how we look at it, too.

Creativity and innovation should be completely separate. I’m very clear with clients—I’m not talking about innovation, you have hundreds of people to do that, but together we will work on the perception you have of your company.

Q: You are famous for your concept of thinking in new boxes. Can you elaborate on what that means and how we go about building new boxes?

Luc de Brabandere:  We always talk about thinking outside of the box. A box is a set of simplifications we have about something. If you work in a bank, you are not asked to think outside of the bank, it’s outside the simplifications you have of banking. In fact, all ideas come out of a given box. The problem is not the box, but how old is this box and how you select a new box.

One question I like to use is “How do you think about someone you don’t know?” When you are a CEO of a company with 10 million clients, you are constantly thinking about people you don’t know. You might know 500 or even 1,000 clients, but you can’t know 10 million. This question forces you to recognize you are using boxes, or categories to classify people and think more about them.

Another question I ask: How many colors in the rainbow? Seven is the number I hear 99 percent of the time. But the rainbow is an infinite number of colors, seven is within you. The seven colors are a simplification of the rainbow, and it’s very useful, because it allows you to draw a rainbow.

The good news is you can do a lot of things with a box, but it has a cost. We simplify the world in order to change it, but there is a lot more outside the box. There are many possible boxes, and there is no science to selecting them. Even if you want to build statistics, you have to select the boxes. For example if you track how many people come to a store at night, it means a priori, you’ve selected the concept “at night.”

No single model, no single box is either true or false. The only way to assess them is the criteria of usefulness. And, since a strategy has to be frozen in order to bring growth, but the world is not frozen at all, one day or another, you will need a new strategy, which means a new box.

Q: What are the best techniques a manager or leader can use to stimulate creativity within a team? How do you know if you’re succeeding?

Luc de Brabandere:  When you teach mathematics, you try to transfer knowledge to a student, and you’re happy at the end of the day if the knowledge you had in the morning is in someone else’s head in the evening. In creativity, absolutely not. You can’t teach creativity; you have to share a passion. So my first tip is: Build what you do from your own passion. Whether you like soccer, fishing, music, whatever—you are ten times better if you use examples of creative thinking from your own passion.

The second is to replace “yes, but” with “yes, and.” Not a single idea on this planet is born good, so it makes no sense to tell someone their new idea is bad.

The success criteria in my job is energy. A good brainstorm brings some new ideas, but it also keeps the energy in the room very high.

Q: What are some of the top inhibitors to creativity? Does the size of the group or organization play a big role?

Luc de Brabandere:  I searched many years for the rules of creativity, but I finally gave up. When you ask people where they got a great idea, it’s sometimes in the shower, it’s sometimes in a meeting. Great ideas can come from large groups.

The same is true for knowledge. If you ask people, “Do you think knowledge is a must for creativity?” they say, “Yes, absolutely.” But you have examples of people finding good things who don’t know anything about a topic. Either/or is not a good way; it should always be and. There is no science to creativity; you can’t organize creativity the way you organize marketing.

Q: Let’s talk about Cartoonbase, the creative agency you founded. What was the impetus behind it and how does it connect to your past work?

Luc de Brabandere:  I started Cartoonbase when I started at BCG in 2001. For the first 10 years, it was an evening job, my passion. Imagination works with images, and I was convinced that artists and consultants should work together, side by side.

To develop and spread creativity throughout BCG, I would use cartoons everywhere rather than PowerPoint. I cannot draw, but Belgium is the home of cartoons; cartoons are part of our culture. The problem is not to find artists, it’s to select the right ones. However, artists cannot talk to CEOs; they need a consultant to translate.

During our last BCG partners meeting, Microsoft’s CEO Satya Nadella was the keynote speaker on the question “What is the number one responsibility of a CEO?” His answer: “To clarify!” I would add “To make things visible.” Cartoonbase videos are known to reach both objectives. That’s where our success comes from.

At Cartoonbase, we have 20 people—half are artists, half are consultants. With video taking off, cartoons are now a side business and the heart of the business is videos. This year, we’ll have 2 million euros in sales, and growth is unlimited.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices