Leading with Empathy: Q&A with Vafa Jamali | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Leading with Empathy: Q&A with Vafa Jamali

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHealthcareHuman Resources OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 11, 2020

7 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipHealthcareHuman Resources OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Healthcare Leading Forward Podcast Series:

On and Beyond the Frontlines of Covid-19

Close

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

David Krahe

Dallas

Vafa Jamali is Senior VP and President of Respiratory, Gastrointestinal & Informatics business at Medtronic. Recently, he has been working extensively with the White House Coronavirus Task Force on managing ventilator supply for healthcare providers and facilities.

Recently, Vafa spoke with Russell Reynolds Associates’ Managing Director and Global Healthcare Sector Leader, Dana Krueger, and David Krahe, Senior Consultant in Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Medical Device and Diagnostics Practice. Vafa shared his experience of the current leadership challenges arising amid the current pandemic and offered his perspective on the future.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

David Krahe: Vafa, you have responsibility for the ventilator business at Medtronic – a device that has been front and center during this global crisis. What has been the impact on the company?

Vafa Jamali: As with many companies, the non-essential aspects of our business had to shut down, so a portion of our business really stalled. At the same time, we had another portion that was facing unprecedented demand and very limited supply. Half of my business is greatly impacted negatively, and the other half has never worked this hard before. We had to learn how to manage these two things.

In addition to the business challenge, we’ve had to balance professional demands with the reality that we have colleagues who are working parents and are now part-time teachers of their own children. It really tests a whole lot of assumptions of how work has to be done. This has required us to show more empathy and compromise than normal. It has also tested our definition of what constitutes a victory. Single battles are less relevant when you look at the long term. Playing for the long term has been really critical for both our people strategy and our work strategy – whether you’re in the respiratory business or in a business that was impacted in a different way because it is associated with elective surgeries.

Dana Krueger: Has the current crisis had an effect on your leadership approach?

Vafa Jamali: This situation has made me focus on what it means to lead through ambiguity. There’s never been a more ambiguous time than right now. How do you continue to be decisive when so much is uncertain? How do you continue to make decisions both for the immediate needs of the respiratory portfolio as well as for when we come out of this? How do we emerge even stronger?

Dana Krueger: How have you adjusted your leadership style – and what is the magic answer to those questions you are asking yourself?

Vafa Jamali: When I look back, I see a few things around leadership. First, I think those who are able to control their egos are going to get better results. You think about the complexity and ambiguity of a global crisis, and nobody really understands all the elements of the situation. Nobody understands exactly what people are going through, how severe it’s going to be, or when we’re going to come out of it. There’s much more uncertainty than normal. Second, I would say that influencing skills are much more valuable than exerting direct control via traditional reporting lines. Leaders with listening skills and empathy are really critical right now.

Now is also not the time for kneejerk reactions, which could over-index or miss the mark entirely. At the same time, decisiveness is more important than likability. People are looking for decisions one way or the other. You’re probably not going to be right, but that’s when the ability to adjust and tack quickly comes into play. Finally, I think we have to be very kind during this, whether we’re talking about the caregivers on the front line who are treating patients or the colleagues with kids who are teaching them while working from home. These are some of the attributes of a kinder, more empathetic leadership style. And these attributes are here to stay after the crisis, I believe.

David Krahe: How is your organization thinking about the business going forward and how are you preparing teams for the post-COVID-19 reality?

Vafa Jamali:  We’re thinking about how this pandemic is changing the approach to in-person contact in healthcare, such as the impact on the intimacy of the doctor-patient interaction, and thinking about how that might change our place as medical device professionals in the hospital setting. For instance, the doctors, nurses, and technologists in the hospital are the ones most susceptible to contracting the virus, so how do we support them better? We also have to think about how our work should take into consideration this new reluctance on the part of patients to visit a hospital. Can we find ways to triage reluctant patients that get them into care when their conditions warrant a visit to the hospital? How can we help triage this group, so that they don’t become even more vulnerable because now they are skipping check-ups and no longer managing a chronic disease? How do we innovate to develop technologies that support a more minimal-touch environment, creating technologies that naturally allow for a little more space? We’re educating our teams on why it is important to stop going into hospital settings as frequently as before. We’re preparing them to manage relationships remotely.

Dana Krueger: Beyond your direct clients, how have your relationships with other organizations throughout the healthcare ecosystem changed?

One of the things we saw right away was the importance of coordination among all companies that were making ventilators. The demand was so high, and each company was only able to make a fraction of the very large number that was required. So, we quickly realized that unless we got everybody together and allocated ventilators accordingly, it wouldn’t happen. What I presented to FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] was an allocation model based on severity of disease as well as on ICU capacity. This way of working threw out the door the old method of shipping product based on where the first invoice gets sent to or who paid the most. We [at Medtronic] completely changed that to a needs-based model, and also made pricing standard across the board. We suggested that FEMA do the same thing, so they would have all these different suppliers who also used the same model and pooled their resources, ensuring that the product got to the right place. We would typically go after our own orders and our own customers, but in this case we threw all of that out, instead focusing on where the need is.

Dana Krueger: Do you see a model of cooperation or coordination continuing even after this immediate crisis is behind us?

David Krahe: I think it is possible, but I think there are complexities that come with this way of working that the crisis sort of allows us to work around. The complexities of in-servicing different types of products, making sure they're used accurately and properly, and making sure you have the right product for the right need would all need to be woven into a new model. I think that because of the pace that we're moving at, we’ve been willing to work on some technologies like a manufacturer-agnostic app-based training module. In a post-crisis environment, however, I still think that you would probably want to maintain some sort of brand uniformity.

David Krahe: Is there anything you know now – 6 or 7 weeks into this crisis response – that you wish you had known at the beginning?

David Krahe: I certainly learned a lot around managing through ambiguity and the creativity of teams when pressed with this kind of condition. Our innovation cycle just tightened so quickly, and we came up with so many new technologies in a portfolio that really hadn't seen tons of innovation for years. I just can't say enough how proud I am of these engineers that stayed up and created these new platforms to help caregivers and patients. So, if I could deliver a message to myself 6 weeks ago, I would tell myself to just move ahead, and if you make a mistake, you can easily tack. Just don't get married to a particular path. Ultimately, the lessons learned will make us stronger, and caregivers and patients safer.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices