Interview with Centrica Chairman Sir Roger Carr | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Centrica Chairman Sir Roger Carr

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

May 15, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Sir Roger Carr, Chairman of Centrica, discusses boardroom culture and inclusion, the Chairman’s role in hostile M&A and making sure executives earn their rewards.

PLAY VIDEO

An Edited Transcript

Chapter 1 - Setting the cultural tone of the board.

Roger Crockett: Sir Roger, let’s start by discussing the chairman’s role as it relates to the structure and culture of
the board.

Sir Roger Carr: It starts, I think, with picking the team. You then set the tone. And finally, you shape the culture of an
organization. And you do that from a position of influence, of course, as chairman, rather than of power. But
if you do those things well, the board then tends to function well and acts as a unitary group in the interests
of the corporate entity as a whole.

Roger Crockett: Well, in setting that tone, how do you go about that? What steps do you take? How do you
demonstrate your influence?

Sir Roger Carr: Well, I think you have to have clear values as a chairman as to what you believe is the right way to run a
business. It is a cultural thing. It’s also a philosophical issue: The belief in what is right and wrong, the way
a company should work, the degree of transparency it should operate with, whether it works positively for
shareholders, whether it looks more broadly at all stakeholders. So, you have to shape a view. And out of
that, I think you set a cultural tone, and from that a board will develop in a specific direction.

Chapter 2 - “Yes to women on boards, no to quotas.”

Roger Crockett: You lead the nominations committee as Chair. What are your thoughts on the current rules that
are designed to try to increase the number of women, and thus diversify boards of directors?

Sir Roger Carr: I think with this specific issue on gender diversity it’s part of a broader issue. Boards need to have a broad
skill set. And they need to be as a group, people who reflect all the stakeholders of a company—whether
it’s the customers, the employees, or indeed, the shareholding community. So, when you get down to
gender, it’s pretty important that within a board women make up a sensible and material part of the board
grouping. So, I’m very positive about the move towards broadening the role of women on boards in this
country. I’m very against quotas. I’m very positive about aspirational targets, and I think the Davis Report,
which effectively targets 25% of a board by 2015, is a good target to aim for. I think one should see it as
something that encourages a very sensible, and in fact, practical solution to having a board that does reflect
all of its constituent parts and customers. So, on women on boards I’m very positive. They undoubtedly
improve the dynamics, the atmospherics of the boardroom, and in so doing, it helps decision-making and
the quality of decision-making.

Chapter 3 - Defending against a hostile takeover.

Roger Crockett: Let’s talk about the visibility of the board and the chairman, particularly during difficult situations.
Mergers and acquisitions can be pressure-cooked times for a company. Given your experience—
say at Cadbury, as a former director there, a former chair overseeing M&A activity—what is the
role of the chairman when there is an important acquisition on the front?

Sir Roger Carr: I think that when you take the role you do accept that it is one of influence rather than direct power. I think
you also accept that you will spend much of the time in the wings, and not too much of the time at center
stage. Now, in the case of acquisitions, my fundamental position is that acquisitions are driven by executive
management. They are led by executive management, and the execution is through executive management.
And in those circumstances, the chairman and the non-executives will be a check and balance

I think in a reverse situation, where the company which you chair becomes the prey, then the chairman has
a different role because it is the company that is the prey, and therefore, the chairman is responsible for
it in those circumstances. And I think at that time, the chairman has to be prepared to be very visible and
very vigorous in the defense of his company in the interest of the whole of the stakeholder community, but
particularly the fiduciary duty he has to the shareholders. And to do that, the chairman must agree, I think,
at the outset with management the roles, who is center stage, who is fundamentally running the business
for performance in that period, who is seen as the primary spokesman for the defense, and who is seen as
the primary manager of the business during the defense. Now, with that level of clarity, everybody then gets
on with the job and is charged with delivering their part of the responsibilities in the defense process. And I
think that works well. So, it’s a time in my own view, where chairmen have to be seen to be in charge of the
board and in charge of the fortunes of the company in the face of a direct and hostile attack, but working in
partnership with the executives.

Chapter 4 - “People should only earn a lot of money when they earn a lot of money.”

Roger Crockett: As both a chairman and President of the CBI, remuneration has been one of those things that’s
crossed your desk. What is right about executive pay and what’s wrong with it?

Sir Roger Carr: Well, I think the things that are wrong are: Remuneration that is made for failure and remuneration that is
made at a high level for a mediocre performance. Simply from a common sense perspective, those things
would not be considered appropriate by anybody. Now, conversely, there is absolutely nothing wrong with
receiving a rich reward for an exceptional performance. And in that context, I think it’s up to the board,
particularly in a board such as a FTSE company, which has its own remuneration committee, it’s up to the
remuneration committee to determine, ‘What are the goals that are challenging and what are the rewards
that are appropriate?’ And within that context, the chairman of the board then can participate with the
remuneration committee and help in setting that standard. So, I think it’s setting reasonable standards, but
accepting that people should only earn a lot of money when they earn a lot of money. That’s the key.

There are schemes that actually completely honor those obligations. And you can see in organizations where
people are rewarded well for good performance—when both are visible, reward and performance—the
shareholders are very often entirely comfortable with that. The friction point is when those two things don’t
align. When the effort is limited but the reward is huge, that’s not acceptable to anybody.

Chapter 5 - Government and business: Creating a productive conversation.

Roger Crockett: What about alliances between business and government, which are crucial but can sometimes
be a little bit tense? What is the chairman’s role then in establishing relations with government
officials? How visible should the chair or the directors be?

Sir Roger Carr: Well, I think the chairman does have a role, I mean, as an ambassador for an organization. I don’t think it
should be confused with the need for the executive engagement with government to represent a particular
issue that is challenging for the company and where government is being asked to change behavior in the
interests of that company. So the chairman has, I think, a broader role but nevertheless, has a role.

Roger Crockett: And I guess you have to set the guidelines for what role does a CEO take versus what role does
the chairman take in its relations with the government so those two aren’t confused?

Sir Roger Carr: I think you have to have a joined up communications policy. You have to be on message. You have to be
clear about the script for each, and you have to stay in the areas you have agreed you will work in. That
way, the message is clear, there is no confusion as to what is being said. And importantly, there is no
confusion about the roles of those that are saying it.

Roger Crockett: And so can you share some examples of what business might be doing to help government and
improve the economy right now?

Sir Roger Carr: Well, I think business has to recognize that government can only set the climate. It’s up to business to
deliver the performance, and therefore, the relationship of government and business has to be one of
productive conversation. I think businesses need to be clear on what they do want, what are the trigger
points that will enable them to perform better—not to simply have a list of difficulties, but much more
importantly, a list of opportunities, which if government works towards, can be beneficial to the country as
well as the particular business.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices