Interview with Former WNBA President Val Ackerman | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Former WNBA President Val Ackerman

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview

May 13, 2022

8 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipInclusionHealthcare

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Val Ackerman, former WNBA President, discusses women in leadership, how to succeed in a male-dominated industry, and the leadership development benefits of sports.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

CHAPTER 1: Not everybody wins.

Roger Crockett: Val, I think you and I both agree that organized sports lays a foundation for
success later in life. What is it about team sports that translates into leadership skills in the
professional arena?

Val Ackerman: You know I can personally attest that if you play sports early on, whether it’s at
a youth level, at a high school level, or at a collegiate level, there are things that you take away
from that, things that come back and help you in a positive way later on in life—in any number
of professions. I had the privilege of playing intercollegiate sports at the University of Virginia at a
time when women’s sports at the college level were really just getting off the ground. For me, to
be on the women’s basketball team was like taking a class because of the things I learned. But,
also, the fact that my team didn’t do so well early on forced me to have to deal with failure and
adversity and picking up and moving on the next day. I think that lesson, the lesson of how to
respond to defeat is really one of the most powerful lessons that sports can teach because not
everybody wins. You have winners, of course, but you also have losers, and the losers have to
sort of figure things out for the next go around.

CHAPTER 2: College sports is one of the best leadership training grounds

Roger Crockett: You also serve on the Board of the Knight Commission, an organization that’s
focused on academic performance and policy at the collegiate level. What do you feel it is about
the necessity for a good education that translates into leadership skills?

Val Ackerman: College sports in our country are kind of at an interesting time because in the
cases of certain sports, in particular Division 1 football and Division 1 men’s basketball, they’ve
become very much commercial enterprises. The overwhelming majority of intercollegiate athletes
make their livings in something else. So for them it’s really, really critical that college sports be in
perspective and so the Knight Commission is one of several groups out there that I would say
are really pushing the balance perspective. Trying to make sure, through their advocacy of the
values of intercollegiate athletics, that things be kept in perspective, that schools don’t spend too
much, that athletes aren’t asked to do too much and that, in the end, it’s the educational mission
that comes first. For me, having been a student athlete myself, I couldn’t believe more strongly in
that mission.

Roger Crockett: Do you feel like the schools are doing a good enough job in managing that
balance, that they’re producing leaders outside of sports the way that they should be?

Val Ackerman: I think the leaders in college sports now are more challenged than ever before—
whether they be university presidents, or whether they be athletic directors or whether they
be coaches—because in certain conferences and at certain schools, the pressures to win are
extraordinary. These are people who have to respond to these pressures, but at the same time
because they’re in the higher education business they have to keep in the forefront of their
minds what they’re doing to keep the educational mission upfront and not let it be completely
subsumed by the athletic temptations. Because the student athletes that come out of these
programs, for the most part, tend to be very, very well-equipped. Many are great jugglers. If
you’re playing lacrosse at the University of Notre Dame and you go through the experience of
being an athlete there and going through classes there. If you’ve got a great GPA and you’ve
accomplished whatever you can accomplish on the playing field, you’re going to be in pretty
good shape just because of what you’ve learned and the kinds of experiences you’ve had, and
what it means for your resume to have had that experience. So I think college sports remains one
of the best training grounds for leaders that we have in this country

CHAPTER 3: A female pioneer: Succeeding in a male-dominated industry.

Roger Crockett: Val, your leadership extends well beyond just women’s basketball. You’ve
worked in the front office of the men’s pro league—the National Basketball Association [NBA]—
and you’re President of USA Basketball. These are male-dominated arenas. Do you feel as if
you’ve been somewhat of a pioneer in the industry?

Val Ackerman: I’ve probably been a bit of a pioneer in the sports business world. When I started
at the NBA, my first job in sports was as a staff lawyer for the National Basketball Association.
There were really very few women who were working at a senior level in sports. When I came
in my mentors were, for the most part, men in the business: people that I came to know came
to respect greatly for their leadership skills, their experience, their smarts. There were very few
women to look up to, and that made at times for a lonely experience, particularly when I had
children because there weren’t any women I could talk to, to say, “Hey, how does this work?”
“How can I come back and work full time and have a small child at home?” [I lacked] the moral
support that you often get from other women in the workplace who are experiencing the same
thing. So I would say that was probably the hardest part for me—figuring out the work-life
balance. But, I will say that it’s changing. There are more women than ever working in sports.
It’s a very desirable profession for men and women alike. I have met some of the most talented
people I know who happen to be women who work in the sports business now. They are smart,
they’re energetic they’re leaders and I think some will go on to do really big things. I have found
that to be successful as a woman in the sports business takes a certain thickness of skin. You
have to be really good at what you do. You have to roll with things at times, and have a sense
of humor. You have to know at times when to pick your spots. I think the women who are really
good care deeply about sports. They have that passion that people have when they talk about
sports, and so there’s an authenticity about the reasons why they’re doing it.

Roger Crockett: Were you, or do you think that women are today, held to a different standard so that you had to perform differently or that, perhaps, you were judged differently?

Val Ackerman: It’s hard for me to really say whether there’s a double standard for women or
not. I never really kind of looked at it that way or thought because I was a woman I had to do
something different. I always just thought that I do things differently. I tend to be someone who
prepares thoroughly. I don’t always think I’m the smartest person in the room because I’ve dealt
with some very, very smart minds both when I worked on Wall Street and then when I went into
the sports business. So I tried to compensate for that by coming in feeling very prepared. So,
that, for me, has been an advantage. I’ve always been a reasonably hard worker. That really
comes in handy in the sports business because for all the glamour that it’s perceived to have,
the reality is it’s a very hard business to work in. It’s very, very demanding. The hours are rough,
people work very hard in the business. If you don’t work hard, you can bet that there’s somebody
who wants your job who’s going to work twice as hard as you to get that job. It’s a travelintensive business. You can’t call into the Super Bowl—you have to show up.

CHAPTER 4: The slow process of elevating women to executive ranks

Roger Crockett: Can you talk a little bit about where women are in the international scene when
it comes to leadership positions?

Val Ackerman: The good news I think in global sports is that women are really showing up
and performing. If you look at the Olympics in London this past summer, there were record
numbers of women competing across the board. Team USA had more women than men making
up their total roster. You saw women from Middle Eastern countries, which had never before
been allowed to compete in the Olympics, now being allowed to compete for the first time by
their home countries. So women are becoming more of a force on the playing surfaces. That’s
the good news. What needs to happen in a bigger way is for women to be represented in the
executive ranks of national Olympic committees, in the U.S. national governing bodies, in the
ranks of international sports organizations that facilitate the opportunities for women at all levels
to play in sports. That’s frankly been a slow process. The United States has been a leader in
this. We really are a beacon in terms of representation of women in sports, whether as athletes,
whether as administrators, whether as coaches, you name it, the United States is really out
front. I give Title IX a lot of the credit for that. That has opened up so many doors and created so
many ripple effects. Other countries tend not to have a Title IX. So for them they have to counter
the lack of opportunities not with legislation like we did, but they have to break through cultural
barriers. They have to get the funding. And there have to be sympathetic men who open the
doors for them, and that tends to be a much slower process.

Roger Crockett: You’re something of what I’m going to call an entrepreneur, having launched
successfully the WNBA [Women’s National Basketball Association] league. What skill set, Val, do
you feel is necessary for launch leadership, regardless of gender?

Val Ackerman: I was very fortunate. I feel like I was in the right place at the right time to help
lead the launch of the WNBA. At that time, the early ‘90s, women’s basketball was really getting
off the ground in the United States. It was being televised widely, there were great rivalries
building. The launch was unique in that we weren’t a mom and pop trying to do this—we were a
launch within a larger organization because we had the NBA behind us in every imaginable way.
We were looking at what had worked and didn’t work in the NBA and other sports and adjusting
accordingly in terms of the model that we used to launch the league: the way we marketed it,
things that we required of the players. Our motto was: “If the NBA could start all over again
from scratch based on everything that it’s learned in the last 30 or 40 years, what would it do
differently?” It was the answers to those questions that became the foundation of the WNBA.

CHAPTER 5: Good leaders excel under incredible pressure

Roger Crockett: Well, it sounds like your experience is similar to a lot of leadership or CEO
positions in other industries. How do you feel leadership is different in professional sports than it
is business or academics?

Val Ackerman: I think the leadership skills in professional sports in many respects mirror the
kinds of traits that are needed for success in other professions: The ability for good leaders,
great leaders, to communicate well; to inspire; and to link action to ideas—because many
great ideas die on the vine. You need good leaders to bring them into being. The ability to
make good decisions is a leadership skill that cuts across any profession. What I think makes
professional sports different is the visibility of the field. If you make a mistake and you’re a leader
in a prominent sports organization, it’s going to be in the newspaper the next day. So there’s
incredible pressure to get things right and to minimize damage if you don’t get things right. So
there’s a public relations element to big time sports in our country that dictates what kinds of
skills leaders need to be successful. As any sports leader knows, if fans go away, everything
changes. All bets are off. It’s all about can the market support this? And that really comes down
to a sports organization’s relationship with its fans. Good leaders recognize what that means and
they recognize why that’s important. As such, they work very hard to preserve that connection.

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices