The Other Way Around: Q&A with Kuen Loon Ho | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

The Other Way Around: Q&A with Kuen Loon Ho

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

Dana Krueger

October 01, 2020

15 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Healthcare Leading Forward

Sustainable Leadership in Action

Close

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

Kuen Loon Ho is Group Chief Executive Officer at Singapore-based Fullerton Health, which owns and operates an extensive network of healthcare facilities across the Asia Pacific region. Kuen is also the Chairman of the Board of Fullerton Health Indonesia and the RadLink Group. Previously, Kuen was Fullerton’s Chief Operating Officer and the General Manager for Singapore; he started at Fullerton as Chief Financial Officer. Prior to joining Fullerton, Kuen was Group Chief Financial Officer at Keppel Integrated Engineering, where he joined as a Keppel Scholar. He brings more than 20 years of experience across Asia Pacific, USA, Europe, and the Middle East.

Recently, Kuen spoke with Dana Krueger, Managing Director and Global Healthcare Sector Leader, and Anupama Puranik, Managing Director and Senior Consultant in Healthcare Asia Pacific at Russell Reynolds Associates. He shared how the COVID-19 health crisis has helped the organization gain new clarity and connection around its long-standing purpose of providing affordable, accessible healthcare to all of Asia Pacific.

PLAY VIDEO

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

Anupama Puranik:
As we collectively set out to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, how are you thinking about purpose?

Kuen Loon Ho:
For us, we are very fortunate that we are in the right place, because we are health care service providers and the silver lining of this crisis is that it allows us to highlight our purpose. We are celebrating our tenth anniversary this year and our founding purpose was to provide affordable, accessible care in all of Asia Pacific. When the founders started the organization ten years ago, we started organically and in Singapore. Today, we are in nine countries with more than 550 clinics and about ten million patients. Two and a half years ago, we revisited this purpose, to test if it was still the right purpose for us as an organization. We said “yes” – and this time, with collective agreement from all the leaders in all the countries. With this renewed focus around purpose, we were able to respond well when the crisis hit in March.

This has been the guiding compass for us in the last six months – in the way we care for patients, in the way we care for the community, in the way we contribute to recovery, and in the way we engage with clients as well. When we talk about affordability, it is all about beating inflation. When we talk about accessibility, it is about how to provide care to more people. The number of lives is the key metric to us. In both areas, in this COVID-19 crisis, we have talked a lot about how to partner with the government, because a lot of the initiatives are government-led. This leads us to more than 15 projects across the region that we are involved with at a government-related level, so that we are able to help them solve problems, such as how to bring care to the community, how to do the [COVID-19 test] swabbing, and how to store tests. In Singapore alone, we were involved in eight different projects. That includes caring for almost a hundred thousand migrant workers and working on projects that we have never done before.

This brings out the essence of our purpose: doing things that we have not done before, but doing them because they enable us to bring affordability and accessibility to the general population. And in this crisis, we will do them no matter what. I am very proud of the team, that we all have gone out of our comfort zone to be able to contribute to this.

Dana Krueger: If you think about how you have approached this as a leader – this doubling down on your purpose and maybe even changing the way you interact with potential partners or customers, or communicate around your purpose – what would you say were the one or two key aspects of your leadership style that you changed to adapt to the current situation?

Kuen Loon Ho: When the crisis happened, we had to change, at least for a period of time, from being long-term focused to very short-term focused, very immediate. I took on the CEO role on the first of January, and we entered the year with great plans. You have a five-year plan – how you are going to lead the organization, how you are going to live out the purpose for the long-term. When the crisis then hits, you have to put that aside.

This is very important. This is the reminder to our leaders that being agile, flexible, and adaptable is key. Because suddenly, in two months’ time, you have to switch your mindset, put the plan aside, review the current situation, recognize it is a crisis. We had to just focus on caring about the patients and our people. The safety of our people is key, because we have thousands of people at the frontline and they have direct contact with the COVID-19-positive patients. We have to prioritize their safety more than ever. And, secondly, is the patient: how do we bring more care to the patient? The discussion of the economics became a second priority; it is more about contributing to the community that will come first. Act first, and we will sort out the rest later. If this is the right project for us to engage in, let us take it on and figure out how to execute on it.

It is a very different dynamic. Normally, you do a lot of planning and work out your ROI before you take on a project. In such a situation, it is really the other way around. Is this the right thing to do? Then do it. Is this a thing that we think we can do, even though we have not done it before? Let us accept it and then figure it out. This has to be the guiding principle, and I give credit to my team that they have been very agile, and they have given us the ability to contribute in the last six months.

Dana Krueger: Anything else you are doing in your day-to-day to anchor purpose? I am assuming that if this now becomes part of the long-term plan, you are really leading with purpose.

Kuen Loon Ho: That is true. I think there are a couple of things that are very important. First, you need to talk about it, very often. You just have to be a broken record. Keep reminding people what our purpose is and why we are doing this and keep reinforcing it again and again and again. Otherwise, in a very profit-driven world, sometimes you do not go back to why you are doing certain things, and the “why” is very important. We talk a lot about it in our leadership meetings. For example, in most of the meetings, we start off with one person sharing a case study of how they have come across the shared values, or how we live the shared values, because the purpose is driven by the five shared values that we have in the organization: compassion, teamwork, partnership, integrity, and innovation. Talk a lot about it, that is one.

Two, as the leader – not just myself but my fellow leaders as well – walk the talk. That is extremely important. If you talk, but you do not walk, there is a disconnect.

And, finally, intentionally showcase the moments when people really live this purpose, these shared values. We should share these examples, and really acknowledge how they have done it and why they have done it, and then this will reinforce each other. So, to your question, these are the three steps that we do on a daily basis to try to reinforce and anchor the purpose.

Anupama Puranik: Could you talk a little about how you would assess people that you are hiring into the leadership team in light of this? How do you make sure that they are aligned to that sense of purpose, and how do you build that into them once they come on board?

Kuen Loon Ho: That is a very good question. There are a few things that happen now when we have conversations with potential candidates, or potential future teammates, when we first interview them. Instead of just focusing on what they can do, we also ask about their value systems. We talk a lot about what they believe in, how they can contribute as a member of the team, not just in terms of the economics, but also in terms of the dynamics, and whether they believe in the purpose statement or not.

But you have to strike a balance, because at the end of the day we are still a profit-driven organization. We still have stakeholders and shareholders. And we cannot just bring in people who are completely purpose-driven but not balanced with the financial economics. I think the new world is to find somebody that is balanced, but not to one extreme, because if you are purely focused on purpose, you may be better off in a non-profit organization.

This is where we need to strike a balance when we bring in people and talk to them. Once they are integrated into the business, it should become part of their performance appraisal. We have not yet done this but are starting soon. It is not just how competent they are, or how many KPIs they have achieved, but also about whether or not they live the purpose and the shared values that we have. We are adding that in, starting in small steps, in the sense that we will have a trial run to communicate this will be evaluated, but not part of the KPIs yet. But next year and onwards, they will be a part of the weightage. Our hope with this change is that people will realize that we are serious about it, walking the talk.

Dana Krueger: That is fascinating, Kuen, particularly around aligning the incentives system to the behaviors. Can you tell us a little bit more about the concept that you have, and how are you thinking about operationalizing that?

Kuen Loon Ho: To be honest, that is why we are taking smaller steps to try to operationalize it, because this can be quite subjective. We try to ask very direct questions during the evaluations, using a scale of one to five, to gauge what level the individual is at now. For example, under “compassion”, we have five questions and we ask the individual: “Have you done this or not, where are you now?” That is our starting point. But over time, we need to refine it. Over time, I suspect, the question will be different for different seniority levels, and different for people with different functions.

“Compassion” will mean something different to a person who is a nurse at the frontline versus a finance person at the backend. I believe it is a learning journey, a way for us to get to something that we are comfortable in, because it is again a balance of not being overly generic but not too specific. We need to start off with something, we need to start with a vision and an end goal and the understanding that it is a learning journey and a process together.

Dana Krueger: We look forward to learning from you on how that goes. We are hearing across the board from clients that they are taking steps in this direction, because you are right, it is not only about profit. It is about people and it is about society, which is what we mean when we talk about sustainable leadership.

Looking at the bigger picture again, you run one of the largest and most influential healthcare provider associations within Asia Pacific, so you also play a very important role to the industry. What impact do you hope to have, or what role do you hope to play, in advancing and enhancing the overall purpose of the industry? You are living it at Fullerton, but how would you like to influence the rest of the ecosystem?

Kuen Loon Ho: There are three levels that we think about in relation to this. One is from the perspective of our principal values around universal health. We look at how to play a part in advocating more for private sector participation in universal health coverage. There has been a lot of talk in the past – the paradigm has always been that the universal health system has to be for the public sector. Increasingly, I think the private sector has a role to play and we have to look at how we can contribute and collaborate here. It is a big topic, but that is something that we are very keen on. In different countries, we probably have to play a different role in the broad spectrum of universal health. That is one theme.

The second theme is our involvement in the World Economic Forum. We have been quite active in this particular dimension of universal health coverage, through private participation at the Economic Health Forum. We have been a member of the Economic Health Forum for the last few years and one of my founders has been taking the lead in this area in a couple of countries as well. We are proud to be collaborating with a leading organization to achieve this together.

And, finally, we have taken the initiative to drive more local partnerships. For example, we are active in tuberculosis screening, starting in Indonesia. It is quite interesting, because the statistics today show that more people die of TB than of COVID-19. Since everybody is talking about COVID-19, many people forget about the three diseases that have not been fully resolved: TB, malaria and HIV. Those three health issues have killed more people than COVID-19 at this point, and because of COVID-19, resources have channeled in other directions, so that area has been even more neglected. We have been championing TB screening in Indonesia, we have done a lot of health screening, and we work with a lot of fellow partners, like Philips, Johnson & Johnson and many others. My point is that at the local level, if there is a specific disease that you want to focus on, you can also bring in very tangible, actionable steps. Our outreach has impacted close to hundreds of thousands of Indonesians. Because of the COVID-19 situation, it has slowed down this year, but we do want to continue to champion this. Just because COVID-19 arrived, many have forgotten about other diseases which have been around for centuries and are killing even more people.

Anupama Puranik: Thank you so much. This has been so interesting to hear, especially the last point you made about joining hands with the pharma and the devices sectors as well. This puts the trinity together – pharma, devices and healthcare delivery services – to look at an integrated care model. Thank you so much for your time today, this was a wonderful conversation.

Kuen Loon Ho: Thank you so much – it has been a very enjoyable session.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices