Becoming Chess Players: Q&A with Subhanu Saxena | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Becoming Chess Players: Q&A with Subhanu Saxena

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

Interview

Dana Krueger

April 27, 2020

15 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipBoard and CEO AdvisorySustainability OfficersBoard EffectivenessTeam Performance

RRA interview

Healthcare Leading Forward: Sustainable Leadership in Action

Close

Dana Krueger

Amsterdam
New York

Subhanu Saxena is the former CEO of the global pharmaceutical manufacturer Cipla, and currently serves as the Head of Life Science Partnerships, Europe for The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. He is also a Senior Advisor at Bain Capital, a Managing Partner at New Rhein Healthcare and an independent Board Member at Kiadis Pharma.

Recently, Subhanu spoke with Russell Reynolds Associates’ Managing Director and Global Healthcare Sector Leader, Dana Krueger, about the challenges and opportunities he sees for healthcare leaders resulting from the current pandemic.

The interview presented below has been edited and abridged for clarity.

AN EDITED TRANSCRIPT

Dana Krueger: Today, we want to have a discussion with you, Subhanu, about leadership in the time of COVID-19 – specifically about your approach to leading your teams and developing their ability to lead as well. To set the stage, can you share a little bit about your current leadership roles and the challenges you see?

Subhanu Saxena: I put my current roles in three buckets. First, it is an enormous privilege to work at The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and here I was originally responsible for industry collaboration. Last year, we gained new capability to fund product introductions. The idea is to help bring innovation to the market and build a team to support it.

Second, I think about my experience as an industry executive. In my previous role as the Managing Director and Global CEO of Cipla, the business model was to take existing molecules and bring them to patients to serve unmet needs, even without big innovation.

And, finally, in my Board roles, my goal is to develop executives, unify them around the organization’s purpose, and help them keep momentum.

It is in a crisis that we learn our greatest leadership lessons, and we are all “students” today. Thirty years of experience have prepared me for this time, but I am still learning as well.

Many years ago, a teacher told me that if you see an interesting book, buy it; it will help you later. The same is true with leadership experience – you will need it. It is more important than ever to reflect on difficult situations and understand how you came into them, what you learned from them, and how to come out of them stronger.

Dana Krueger: What specific leadership challenges have emerged from the COVID-19 crisis for you and/or those you are working with?

Subhanu Saxena: It is a brand-new virus for all of us, and the situation is slightly different each day. With the speed that this crisis has developed, you need to be agile and able to course-correct. Course-correcting is incredibly important, as no one has all the answers right now.

The ability to make decisions with imperfect information is really important, as well. You have to understand the best and worst cases and go from there.

One of the biggest challenges, though, is when leaders think they have all the facts and answers, but they actually don’t. To paraphrase my friend Thomas Ebeling (former CEO of Novartis Pharmaceuticals), you should speak to five people before making a big decision. That is in part because people tend to react to the last thing they learn. We all have our biases, but if you take the time up front to probe, ask questions, and really understand the scope of the issue, you will be able to go faster later.

Right now, the stakes are high, and there are big consequences for making the wrong decision.

Besides strategy, the main question for leaders these days is how to keep energy and momentum among employees. We deal with different types of personalities and each member of a team brings their own character and family situation. You have to have the ability to connect if you are going to succeed; that is the most important thing. Connecting and giving a grounding factor, or purpose, go hand in hand in this respect. So, I would summarize the challenges as a greater need for agility, resilience and scenario planning, as well as a clear purpose. We all are becoming chess players now.

Dana Krueger: Being one of the most purpose-driven leaders I know, I would be interested in hearing more about what that phrase – “purpose-driven leader” – means to you?

Subhanu Saxena: This is a time where purpose really matters. It’s not only “what” you’re doing but also “why” – and “why” is the purpose.

In corporate strategy, there is usually a lot of fluff. Now is the time to simplify your business model down to the fundamental business reason – the “why.” In some sectors, like healthcare, it is clearer than in others.

In musical terms, think of this as an “unplugged” way of doing business, like an “unplugged” concert. You’re taking out any unnecessary or artificial amplifications and creating a purer sound.

You have to be very thoughtful and, at the same time, action-oriented.

Dana Krueger: In the healthcare ecosystem, many organizations have pivoted their businesses and carved out the necessary resources to help solve the crisis. It has happened organically, both in the scientific community and in the provider world, in terms of how we’re treating patients, developing vaccines, and manufacturing safety equipment. They’ve gone from saving the business to saving the world. Coming out of this, do you see an opportunity to “re-set” the industry’s reputation?

Subhanu Saxena: Healthcare professionals are the heroes of today, and they should absolutely get our appreciation.

And yes, in other parts of the ecosystem, we have to continue to build relationships. The open platform that is allowing collaborations on COVID-19 solutions has created one of the largest R&D communities in human history (comparable with the human genome project). With this kind of collaboration, we are even closer to realizing that the whole world is one family.

Dana Krueger: Speaking of the future, how are you preparing for the post-COVID-19 reality?

Subhanu Saxena: I remember my old boss in Russia saying, in times of uncertainty, “All of your forecasts are precisely incorrect.” In 6 to 9 months, this lack of visibility will hit us. That is what we need to prepare our organizations for right now.

Thinking ahead, supply capability will be one of the most critical needs. We have to be five steps down the road on this front. We must plan for success, so that when vaccines are ready, say in around 9 months, we are ready. Again, we have to be chess players.

The other issue is how we help people adjust to the “new normal.” We’ll need to help connect them and remind them they are not alone, especially as we wait for more clarity on how to re-open society safely.

Dana Krueger: What kind of competencies do you look for in leaders at a time like this? What muscles do you need to have or be developing to be an effective leader in today’s crisis and, importantly, beyond?

Subhanu Saxena: The most important ones are agility, resilience, and compassion and the ability to plan for various scenarios, bring clarity to the fog, and articulate the “why” behind every “what.”

Great leaders never shy away from sharing the truth. In addition, they draw the roadmap for getting out of trouble. They empower others, especially rising leaders, to co-create the future.

The good news is that solving this crisis has become a unifying purpose, and leaders are rising to the occasion in exceptional ways. Post-crisis, I expect we will see very compelling leaders emerge and very strong companies as a result.

Dana Krueger: Thank you, Subhanu, for taking the time to share your perspectives and for being so inspirational.

Subhanu Saxena: It has been my pleasure to speak with you. As leaders we all need to embrace the learning journey we’re on in order to lead the way as best we can through this crisis and beyond.

Team Performance

Preparing a Board for Rapid Growth

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices