Why Purpose-Driven Leadership Matters Now More Than Ever: A Q&A with Paul Polman | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

Why Purpose-Driven Leadership Matters Now More Than Ever: A Q&A with Paul Polman

Why Purpose-Driven Leadership Matters Now More Than Ever: A Q&A with Paul Polman

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO Advisory

Interview

April 22, 2020

10 min

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipBoard and CEO Advisory

Executive summary

Paul Polman says human health and planetary health go hand-in-hand and any time one of those areas is neglected there will be a larger price to pay for the other.

Close

"This is a leadership moment that will separate those who are sincere about a more responsible business model from those who just pay lip service to it."

Paul Polman’s decade-long tenure as Unilever CEO redefined the meaning of good business. From his first day in 2009, he set ambitious goals for the now-$57 billion maker of household goods that put purpose on par with profit. That meant multistakeholder capitalism, in which focusing on the interests of employees, suppliers, retailers and the environment would ultimately benefit investors, and the Unilever Sustainable Living Plan (USLP), a set of commitments based on the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to improve social impact in tandem with boosting sales. During his tenure, Unilever outperformed its industry on both the top and bottom lines and delivered an impressive 290 percent shareholder return.

Though some initially questioned this primacy of purpose, Unilever made remarkable progress over Polman’s 10 years on many commitments such as improving health and well-being for an incremental 650 million people, driving sustainable sourcing up to over 65 percent of the total and moving to green energy and gender equality. It was consistently ranked number one on the Dow Jones Sustainability Index, and sustainability research firm GlobeScan put its corporate reputation well ahead of other highly respected companies.

Since retiring from Unilever in 2019, Polman has focused his efforts on helping other companies find similar success. At the request of the UN Secretary General, he is one of 17 SDG Advocates globally and co-founder and chair of IMAGINE, a benefit corporation and foundation accelerating business leadership to achieve SDGs. He serves as vice-chair of the UN Global Compact, to which Russell Reynolds Associates is a signatory. He is also chair of the International Chamber of Commerce, The B Team and Oxford Saïd Business School.

Recently, Polman spoke with Russell Reynolds Associates consultant Simon Kingston, co-leader of the firm’s nonprofit sector, about how he scaled purpose-driven leadership within Unilever and why the COVID-19 crisis is heightening the need for leaders to reorient their businesses around basic humanitarian values.

Simon Kingston
Was there a moment that led you to say, “The way I lead my commercial life is going to be informed by this focus on sustainability”?

Paul Polman
For me, sustainable development is first and foremost about inclusion and living in harmony with planet Earth. Human health and planetary health go hand in hand, as the recent COVID virus reminds us once more. When you fight for equal opportunity for everybody, for example, for people to have access to education or food or clean drinking water, you fight for basic human values, which are the bedrock of functioning societies—dignity and respect, equity and compassion. Any time you violate that, as we’ve seen so often in the past 20 or 30 years, people suffer. It makes us all responsible. If you know that climate change kills eight million people a year, and you then continue to be a contributor to climate change, you are complicit. If 826 million people still go to bed hungry and you waste food, you are also part of the issue. If you continue to buy from irresponsible companies that encourage slave labor or pay less than fair wages, you are equally irresponsible.

There are some of these human values that I think we’re given very early in our lives. I’m very grateful for my parents; they really had these broader values. Partly as a result of my religious upbringing as well, I’ve always felt that our duty here in this world is to serve others and simply make it a better place than we found it.

Did you always feel able to express those values at Unilever?

The reason I joined Unilever very simply was because the company founder, William Lever, had the same philosophy. He didn’t build this company for the shareholders. He built this company with brands like Lifebuoy or Sunlight to address the problems of Victorian Britain, especially, at that time, the problem of hygiene. If you look at the history of the company, for example, building housing in Port Sunlight for the workers and leading the introduction of universal pension provision in the UK, or taking on the name of his wife in the House of Lords,1 his stance was quite revolutionary and seen by many of his business contemporaries as an outlier. The USLP was simply about going back to the company’s roots, what Lord Lever called shared prosperity.

Over time, the company had become, like others, too dominated by the primacy of shareholder interests. When I came, it needed to go back to its roots and make sustainability an integral part of our business model—to make it, in fact, the strategy.

Your work at Unilever was inspiring to many. What were the skills you looked for in the leadership team you built around you?

Obviously we need all the basic skills required to run a company. But I always say, “A good leader is first and foremost a good human being.” That’s a very important part. And the second is being purpose-driven. You need to discover your purpose because it’s that purpose that gives you energy. Hopefully the company purpose reinforces yours and you help reinforce the company’s. It’s a symbiosis that makes you feel at home and helps you be successful. Also key is to create an environment where each and every one can develop to his or her fullest potential.

In terms of the internal organizational mechanics, how did you build a commitment to sustainability into the culture and throughout such a large organization?

I started the first year working with Bill George, former chairman and CEO of Medtronic and author of True North, to train our top 100 people on learning to understand what makes you tick: your values, your purpose in life, your crucibles. We also spent a lot of time at the beginning figuring out what the values of the company were. Everybody said, “We know our values,” but when we asked them to write them down, it obviously wasn’t so clear.

The USLP was the framework we developed for the business to measure our progress against the Sustainable Development Goals. This was the basis for both corporate and individual performance measurement and reward. The second year, we used those 100 top people to train the next 500. That gave the 500 an opportunity to learn what the leaders learned, and it gave the leaders an opportunity to put their purpose into practice. Then the third year of the cycle was to get results, where we identified big challenges that we had to address, leveraging our purpose. By that time, it was rolled down to about the top 3,000 or 4,000 in the company, a very managed, disciplined rollout of these processes.

Everybody had to develop their personal mission statements. Then in our training, assessment plans, calibration, we embedded these things very much in there and updated them along the years as we gathered our own learnings. It made some people change career paths or apply for other job opportunities, and it got people into the right spaces.

I would never say we achieved 100 percent buy-in of the full organization, despite very high engagement scores, but I would say what really tipped it for about 80 percent is when we could show that it was actually linked to the better business results.

How many people resisted that idea?

Well, it’s not about resisting or not. There are different types of leaders who all embraced it to different degrees.

The majority of people were attracted to Unilever’s purpose. Some people had purposes that they discovered were not fully aligned with the company’s direction, which made them decide to go somewhere else and make very successful careers, and they’re much happier. Some we had to encourage to leave, as they pulled the system down.

How about from the recruiting perspective– did you actively seek out people who aligned with Unilever’s purpose?

Yes, 100 percent. The recruiting criteria were very much driven around purpose. Are we recruiting people who really care about these issues? And are they able to understand the complexities of these issues, the dichotomies involved and how to distill them down to simple action steps? Have they shown ability to work in broader partnerships? Are they systemic thinkers? Not surprisingly, we ended up hiring quite a lot of people who had worked in the NGO community and they did very well in our company.

For the leadership team, we also wanted them to be ambitious and audacious because the targets we were setting, we didn’t know how to achieve them. So we didn’t want leaders who were just playing it safe or simply not to lose. We wanted bold and courageous leaders. You could see these values in the personal lives of many of these leaders; they cared about these social issues. I call it whole leaders versus half leaders.

How long did it take to prove this was good business and to embed the Unilever Sustainable Living Plan?

When I joined in 2009, there was a lot of opportunity to move the company forward, since the company had been declining commercially for over 10 years and had underperformed versus its competition. We put a lot of emphasis on growth initially and made decisions that brands should be managed in a radically more sustainable way. For probably the first three or four years, we were celebrating the growth, and linking it to the new business model, but the data to prove the link was not yet fully there. It was an act of conviction you might say—of simply doing the right thing.

What was clear from the early stages was how attractive our people found the message. Over two million people a year started to apply to us. We were the thirdmost looked-up company on LinkedIn after Google and Apple. We became again the number one employer in most countries, and staff engagement scores were consistently in the top tercile. So we unlocked something in everyone: a sense of purpose but also a sense of belonging to a mission that is bigger than any one of us individually.

By 2015 and onward we had more and more data to show the commercial advantage: The brands that had a higher level of purpose than others were growing twice as fast and were more profitable. The engagement resulted in better resilience, sustainable products were increasingly rewarded by consumers and green energy saved us money. By then I believe the organization started to buy in more fully and the external market became increasingly aware.

What were the biggest friction points in terms of execution?

Where the friction came in was mainly in the “how.” It’s easy to tell management “we need to do this and do that,” but then there are other pressures. Sustainability has trade-offs just like top-line growth has trade-offs with bottom-line growth. So that’s where the tension is, and we as an executive team tried to relieve it. Most leaders delegate complexity downward; I feel it should be just the opposite. You should delegate complexity upward. We said to people, “It’s not a sign of weakness if you can’t manage these trade-offs. You should just bring them to our attention so we can manage that within the total company.” So you need to spend a lot of time on building the capabilities and providing the capacity and funds to let an organization do its job.

At the corporate level, it was a little easier because we just made directional commitments and didn’t allow them to be challenged. These included commitments to green energy, zero-waste factories, sustainable sourcing, minimum wages, tax transparency and putting our pension funds and our other investments under longer term remits with fund managers.

"We certainly can use this crisis to come out in a much better place."

You were one of the first and few CEOs to orient your company around the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals. Now that you’re working with the UN to help others implement them, what do you observe?

For most companies, the SDGs are still mainly about the environment: deforestation, sustainable agriculture, no emissions or clean drinking water, and that’s important. I think the social side is equally

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices