Interview with Procter & Gamble CEO and Chairman Bob McDonald | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Interview with Procter & Gamble CEO and Chairman Bob McDonald

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipInclusionConsumerBoard and CEO Advisory

Interview

February 18, 2018

8 min

Leadership StrategiesSustainable LeadershipLeadershipInclusionConsumerBoard and CEO Advisory

Interview series

Leadership in the Field: Interviews with Global Leaders

Close

Bob MacDonald, CEO and Chairman or Procter & Gamble, discusses the principles of leadership that create innovative cultures and help drive performance.

PLAY VIDEO

Procter & Gamble’s CEO and Chairman shares his view on the principles of leadership and management that create successful, innovative cultures and drive performance in today’s global marketplace.

Bob McDonald on Innovation—An Edited Transcript

Roger Crockett: Innovation isn’t just about products; it’s about people and about culture. In what ways, Bob, do you recommend bringing innovation to management processes and to your
leadership team?

Bob McDonald: That’s a great question Roger because I think at the Procter & Gamble Company, we think about innovation as our lifeblood. We talk about the fact that we have five strengths. One of those strengths is innovation. We expect every employee to deliver innovation. We have to do that because we know as a company, we want to keep our purpose and our values the same but be willing to change everything else in order to achieve our growth targets. So, whether you’re the worker in a factory line, you’re expected to innovate the process of making the product. Whether you’re an executive assistant in a general office, you’re expected to innovate that job in order to continue to improve our ability to touch and improve lives, which is our purpose.

Roger Crockett: Is there a system for helping that innovation process, whether it’s on the factory floor or in the boardroom? Sometimes innovation doesn’t come easily. How do you get your teams to really get there?

Bob McDonald: It’s in everybody’s work and development plan—what we call the annual performance review or the work and development plan. Everybody in their work and development plan has, as a goal, some kind of innovation and then that gets reviewed every quarter, every year, and that’s the way we drive it.

Roger Crockett: P&G, of course, is famous for its program to partner with outside entities, but partnering sometimes is a little bit dicey. How do you recommend going about partnering in order to get the best and most innovation?

Bob McDonald: In the 1980’s, we created a leadership model for Procter & Gamble we called the 3E Model. Envision. Enable. Execute. What we discovered was we had to add a new E. We’ve now gone to a 5E Model, and one of the E’s we added was Engage. The idea is collaboration—that no leader of value does anything by themselves today. The leader really has to engage those around them in order to get the job done. So, we actually train people in collaboration. We train them in our leadership colleges. They get feedback from their organization on their ability to collaborate and so it’s part of our leadership training.

Roger Crockett: So it really comes down to leadership. If the leaders embrace engagement, then they can hand that down to the rest of the organization and thus innovation will be more likely to happen?

Bob McDonald: If your purpose is to touch and improve lives, you’ve got to get out and try to live the life of the consumer whose problem you’re trying to solve. So, we go into homes. We go shopping with consumers. We try and understand what’s the tension in their life? How can we come up with an insight that might result in a big idea?

Roger Crockett: Being involved in the community leads us tangentially to your purpose-driven strategy. Explain this purpose-driven strategy. Why do you feel that this approach makes good business sense when it comes to innovation?

Bob McDonald: The world’s become a lot more cynical. There’s just a cynicism and consumers want to know, before they spend their money to buy a new brand or a new product, they want to know what am I buying into? Not just for that brand but how about the company behind it. So, we believe it’s important that we communicate to consumers that we are a purpose-inspired company. We do that through our brands. But, we also do that through our philanthropy. What we’ve discovered is, the employees who get involved in community service claim they have better work life balance than those who don’t, even though they’re giving up their own time.

Roger Crockett: That sounds terrific. But doesn’t that somehow distract you from the real business, the revenue-driven portion of trying to create and sell products. I mean, is there any danger of forgetting about what shareholders want: trying to drive revenues and profits for the company?

Bob McDonald: Well, we’re lucky, Roger, in that we’re a consumer business so there’s a tremendous congruency with philanthropy, for example, as well as improving our for profit business. For example, we go into a country like Haiti with our safe-drinking water program. We get to meet the thought leaders of the country. Those people later could become our employees, our distributors, if not just simply loyal consumers.

Roger Crockett: And how do you meet that challenge? As you said, it’s a very, very high bar.

Bob McDonald: Well, certainly one of the ways is you send people abroad on international assignments because from that you develop tremendous empathy for the country that you’re working in. As well as, you can scope that up into the empathy you need to have for all countries and all people. Roger Crockett: Well, we know you need to innovate in order to introduce new products at different price points for different consumers. But if you have an organization that’s built to operate at one price point then it becomes incumbent upon the management team to be sensitive enough to gauge the market and understand it’s nuances so that you can innovate where you need to. To me that seems like the tricky part. How do you recommend management teams strike that balance of sensitivity to what’s going on in the market?

Bob McDonald: We want to go from reaching four billion consumers, when I became chief executive to reaching five billion by 2015. We want to triple the amount of new innovation we get from outside the company to $3 billion of new innovations contributing to our sales. The only way we can do that is to innovate for everyone on the economic pyramid, not just those at the top. And then what we have to do—and this is really critical—is you don’t dilute. You don’t innovate for the people on the top of the economic pyramid and then simply dilute that product for the people lower on the economic pyramid. You have to get into homes, and you have to work to discreetly innovate at each point in that pyramid.

Roger Crockett: Give me a sense of how—particularly in a challenging economic time, which we’ve been in for all too long now—when challenges like this arise, do you meet more often with your management team? Is there a different code of conduct that you and your management teams operate by in order to face unprecedented challenge in the market?

Bob McDonald: I think the primary thing is: You’ve got to get out of the office. Just normal human psychology is that when the going gets tough, organizations tend to hunker down and become internally focused. Maybe [managers] even try to place blame within the organization for why things aren’t going right, and they just stay in the office too much and try to do what they’re already doing. They work harder to do what they’re already doing. What I’m suggesting is, get out of the office, get into homes, shop with consumers. Leaders should look for ways to do things differently than they did them before, not simply work harder.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices