Q&A with Fiona Nott - “Creating the right environment for progress” | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

insights

articles

Q&A with Fiona Nott - “Creating the right environment for progress”

Q&A with Fiona Nott - “Creating the Right Environment for Progress”

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionBoard and CEO AdvisoryHuman Resources Officers

Interview

March 15, 2018

7 min

Inclusive LeadershipInclusionBoard and CEO AdvisoryHuman Resources Officers

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

What are the major barriers that female executive women face at work in Hong Kong?

Close

“Creating the right environment for progress”—Caroline Raggett interviews Fiona Nott, CEO at The Women’s Foundation, on the barriers women face in the workplace in Hong Kong.

"When gender stereotypes are brought into an organization, they can filter through into the everyday practices of the workplace. They may not be conscious or explicit, but they become unconscious assumptions, which can have a significant impact on women's advancement."

Fiona joined The Women's Foundation (TWF) as CEO in September 2017, combining her senior leadership experience with a passion for TWF's mission to serve marginalized women and girls in Hong Kong. A former lawyer and Hang Seng Index company secretary, Fiona has lived in Hong Kong for nearly two decades, working as a senior legal professional and adviser to a number of leading corporations in Hong Kong and around Asia, including PCCW, AIA, AIG, Aviva and Chow Tai Fook Jewellery, as well as small and medium-sized enterprises, startups and nonprofit organizations.

She is the co-founder of Room to Read's Hong Kong Chapter and helped establish the Regional Program office in New Delhi, India. She is deputy chair of the Australian Chamber of Commerce Hong Kong & Macau and was founder and chair of its Women in Business Network. She is also a non-executive director of Aesop Hong Kong and Taiwan. In 2015, Fiona won the People's Choice Award for the Advancement of Women in Business at the AustCham Westpac Australia-China Business Awards.

Caroline Raggett: What are the top goals of The Women's Foundation?

Fiona Nott: We are a nonprofit organization dedicated to improving the lives of women and girls in Hong Kong. We aspire to conduct groundbreaking research, run innovative and impactful community programs. Our work is focused on three main goals: firstly, challenging gender stereotypes; secondly, empowering women in poverty; and, thirdly, advancing female leaders in the workplace. So it is a really multifaceted organization, starting with grassroots programs in the community, and going right up to very senior women at the board level.

Caroline Raggett: What a fascinating breadth of work. Focusing on women in the workplace, I would love to understand what you think are the major barriers that women face in Hong Kong today.

Fiona Nott: In Hong Kong, there is generally an extremely strong work ethic, combined with an entrenched culture of presenteeism, which can be very difficult for women who have families or other commitments. There is also little opportunity for flexible working arrangements or part-time work. In addition, maternity leave in Hong Kong is just 10 weeks long—one of the shortest in the world.

Gender stereotypes are very strong in Hong Kong. For example, women are expected to take on the responsibility of childcare and elderly care. We often see that as women move up the career ladder, there are a number that drop out of the workforce due to a variety and combination of reasons: the culture of presenteeism, lack of family-friendly policies, gender stereotyping and a limited number of female role models.

Caroline Raggett: How do you think this gender stereotyping impacts a woman's workplace experience?

Fiona Nott: When gender stereotypes are brought into an organization, they can filter through into the everyday practices of the workplace. They may not be conscious or explicit, but they become unconscious assumptions, which can have a significant impact on women's advancement. For example, in a role that requires international travel, managers may unconsciously favor male candidates because managers believe they do not have the same family responsibilities.

Caroline Raggett: Do you think these stereotypes are more deeply entrenched in Hong Kong than in other countries you've worked in?

Fiona Nott: Certainly. The lack of family-friendly policies and flexibility in Hong Kong is worse than in other parts of the world. You can see this in the statistics: The number of women in middle management, senior management and at the board level is significantly lower in Hong Kong than in many other parts of the world. These entrenched stereotypes and lack of structures within companies to support women translate into a serious lack of women in senior leadership positions.

Caroline Raggett: And for the women who do reach those senior leadership positions and are looking to begin their non-executive careers, do they face similar challenges?

Fiona Nott: Women at this level face even more structural challenges. Firstly, there is a limited pool of available non-executive director positions in Hong Kong for women because of the very low level of board turnover in the city. There are various advocates pushing for stronger regulations on term limits to encourage more non-executive positions to open up and for companies to have a more inclusive board that is representative of their clients and employee base. However, the regulatory framework in Hong Kong that encourages gender inclusion at the board level is really lacking. Certainly, we would like to see more of a recognition that inclusive boards and senior management teams are good for business, as well as a concerted effort from regulators to require companies to have inclusive policies that focus specifically on gender, which set measurable objectives for change and that report progress.

Secondly, there are a lot of family-owned companies listed in Hong Kong, and the way that they approach board recruitment is very different from what is done in other parts of the world. In these organizations, it is more about personal networks and reputation in the city than other factors. Further, these networks are often developed not only in the workplace but also at traditionally more male-focused events. Typically, women do not have the same level of access to these predominantly male networks, and this can hinder their progress significantly.

Caroline Raggett: In this context, what can senior executive women do to make themselves attractive for board positions?

Fiona Nott: Women in Hong Kong must rise to the challenge of getting on a board. This is a great city for networking and it's important that women move out of their comfort zones and join networks that they may not normally operate in, be it the Jockey Club, executive networking groups, organizations that may traditionally be male-dominated, etc. Gaining more visibility, finding more opportunities to talk about business issues and simply meeting board members are all key ways for women to get noticed as high potential board-ready executives. If they are experts in an area, they should make this known. Raising their public profile by speaking on panels, getting involved with business associations and/or gaining board experience at nonprofit organizations are also critical first steps. Moving into traditionally male spaces can be challenging but is a necessary step for women to find board opportunities in Hong Kong.

Caroline Raggett: What should organizations in Hong Kong be doing differently to push for progress on the advancement of female executives and non-executives?

Fiona Nott: Corporations can employ a multipronged approach. Advocacy is really important, as the government listens to the voices of major employers. Organizations must openly discuss these issues and lead by example. At the minimum, they can implement training on unconscious bias, policies on sexual harassment, and ensure that their recruitment processes actively include women in short lists. They should also offer flexible working arrangements and increased maternity leave, return to work, mentorship and sponsorship programs as well as implement measurable plans for retention of female employees and advancement of women into middle and senior management positions. It's important that these types of initiatives are driven by business leaders as well as the HR function.

A key driver is engaging male leaders to be part of the gender inclusion conversation and to help counter gender stereotyping of both women and men. This can have a significant impact on building a culture of inclusion and support for women throughout an organization.

Caroline Raggett: Do you think that we are at a turning point in terms of momentum around this topic?

Fiona Nott: There is certainly a great deal of frustration that the number of women on boards hasn't increased. Despite slow progress on the part of regulators and companies, the good thing is that women seem to be taking this leadership issue into their own hands; they're empowering themselves and empowering each other and creating their own networks. I find this really inspiring.

Caroline Raggett: Thank you, Fiona.

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices