How to Proactively Approach Board Refreshment | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How to Proactively Approach Board Refreshment

Board and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Article

November 24, 2025

4 min

Board and CEO AdvisoryBoard Director and Chair SearchBoard Effectiveness

Executive Summary

To remain effective, boards should look beyond their current composition and think ahead about how they will align with future strategy and challenges.

Close

Theodore L. Dysart

Chicago

Clare Metcalf

Chicago

Reprinted with permission from the National Association of Corporate Directors after originally appearing as an online article on November 20, 2025.

The role of the board has never been more critical or dynamic. Given the complex geopolitical and corporate landscape, boards should function as living, breathing organisms that evolve alongside the companies they oversee.

Proactive Board Refreshment

Regular board refreshment is no longer just a matter of good governance hygiene; it is a strategic imperative. A proactive approach enables boards to continually assess what skills are needed in the boardroom and rigorously evaluate themselves against those needs. It also supports long-term succession planning by allowing time for orderly transitions and broadening the pool of director candidates well in advance of a departure.

Institutional investor expectations about board composition have also tightened. BlackRock, Vanguard Group, and State Street Corp., for example, advise companies to demonstrate a formal process for proactive board refreshment to ensure the board maintains an appropriate mix of skills and diverse perspectives.

Vanguard specifically looks for disclosures on the board's evaluation process, including the identification of skill gaps and opportunities for evolution, to ensure it remains "fit for purpose." State Street’s primary focus is to ensure average board tenure aligns with the industry's business cycle, and State Street explicitly considers a board's refreshment practices when assessing long-tenured directors. BlackRock also considers tenure and “may oppose the election of certain directors who serve on boards that appear to have an insufficient mix of short-, medium-, and long-tenured directors.”

The introduction of the universal proxy card and the rise of shareholder activism have heightened the importance of deliberate board refreshment. Activists increasingly target board seats when they see skill, experience, or independence gaps. With the universal proxy card, shareholders can more easily vote for a mix of company and dissident nominees, making it simpler for both sides to negotiate board representation, instead of resorting to full proxy battles. Boards that fail to refresh themselves risk ceding control over their futures.

How to Approach Board Refreshment

To think proactively about board succession, boards should undergo regular composition reviews, ideally on an annual basis. These exercises can range in complexity and incorporate reviews of board skills matrices and benchmarking against peers or investor expectations.

Reviews may be conducted internally by the nominating and governance committee, but engaging a third-party facilitator is recommended to ensure objectivity. Based on the results of these reviews, the nominating and governance committee can assess the strengths and gaps of the board, enabling committee members to identify potential role updates and director candidates ahead of upcoming retirements and transitions.

Some boards will enact formal mechanisms to ensure refreshment. Age-based retirement limits are the most common: 62 percent of S&P 500 companies used age limits in 2025, with 75 as the most prevalent age for this limit. Term or tenure limits are also slowly rising in popularity, with 10 percent of S&P 500 companies using term limits in 2025, up from 5 percent in 2018. The most common term or tenure limit is 15 years, according to the study.

Key Composition Considerations

Best-in-class boards understand that getting composition right is both an art and a science. Public company boards must comply with regulatory requirements, such as maintaining majority independence and ensuring that they have qualified, compliant board and committee leaders, as well as financial experts. Optionality is key for board leadership succession: Boards should strive to have multiple candidates on the board who could fill leadership roles when necessary.

Boards also should consider the relevant mix of skills and experience needed to match the circumstances of the company and its strategy. Public company CEO, chief financial officer, profit and loss, and other relevant industry experience are typically preferred for service on any company’s board.

As boards face tremendous pressure, different areas of functional and experiential expertise are increasingly important. The top three operational risk concerns for boards right now are cybersecurity and data security risk, political and regulatory risk, and organizational change. Consequently, there is growing demand for directors with cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and business transformation expertise. Despite shifting regulatory and investor expectations, language, and disclosure requirementson board diversity, boards should remain vigilant regarding potential governance vulnerabilities and continue to consider director diversity in all its forms.

Having a well-balanced board is about more than just experience; boards should have the right mix of soft skills and best practice behaviors. No one director will exhibit all the characteristics needed for a high-performing board, so it is crucial to assess current directors and potential candidates based on where they fit in the overall picture.

Going Forward

While proactive board succession planning requires significant effort and investment up front, the payoff is a board that is resilient, future-ready, and better equipped to support company strategy and oversee value creation. Boards that wait until transitions arise risk diminished performance and increased exposure to investor and activist scrutiny. By making board refreshment a standing agenda item and investing in forward-looking succession planning, boards can confidently navigate complexity, anticipate emerging needs, and secure the leadership required for tomorrow’s challenges.

The views expressed in this article are the authors’ own and do not represent the perspective of NACD.

Russell Reynolds Associates is a NACD strategic content partner, providing directors with critical and timely information, and perspectives. Russell Reynolds Associates is a financial supporter of the NACD.

Authors

Theodore L. Dysart is a managing director with Russell Reynolds, focused on placing board members and CEOs.
Clare Metcalf is colead for the Americas region at Russell Reynolds Associates and a member of the firm’s Board and CEO Advisory partners and financial officers practices.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices