CEO Succession: A Never-Ending Story | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

CEO Succession: A Never-Ending Story

SuccessionFinancial ServicesChief Executive OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Article

Laetitia Jerabek

October 28, 2025

6 min

SuccessionFinancial ServicesChief Executive OfficersBoard and CEO AdvisoryCEO SuccessionExecutive Search

Executive Summary

CEO succession in wealth management is ongoing—start now to secure tech-driven leaders who can meet evolving, digital-first client needs.

Close

Laetitia Jerabek

London

The wealth management industry is undergoing major change, as a new generation of digitally-savvy customers comes of age. Though many forces in wealth management are global—AI, customer expectations, generational wealth transfer—the responses to these forces are distinctly local. In the highly competitive UK market, that means your next CEO will need to be someone who can drive change and lead your tech transformation journey - and you need to start your search now.

Traditional wealth management has always been a one-to-one, face-to-face, ‘white glove’ industry, especially compared to other financial services, such as retail banking and insurance.

But the demographic of today’s and tomorrow’s wealth customers is changing. They’re digital natives, who’ve grown up in a digital world and who are significantly more comfortable with technology than previous generations. They still care about having a close, personal relationship with their wealth manager, but they want to be able to interact with them in new ways that harness the latest technologies; a ‘hybrid proposition’ with bespoke solutions tailored to their individual needs, often available through a digital interface with 24/7 accessibility.

In this article, we explore what this major shift means for the wealth management CEO of the future. What skills should you be looking for in your next CEO? And is it better to hire someone from outside the industry, or from within your own walls?

The in-demand skills in a tech-powered era

To thrive in this new era, your next CEO will obviously need a strong understanding of the value technology can bring to the organization—and how to unlock it. But they will also need to have the right leadership capabilities to drive change.

As the Chair of one wealth management firm we interviewed put it: “Digital transformation not only requires an understanding of tech and data, but also experience of different organizational structures and ways of working.”

Through years of research, we know that the leaders who succeed with transformation typically possess the critical traits, such as systems thinking, drive and resilience, curiosity and adaptability, and social intelligence.

These are essential skills you will need to prioritize in your next search or succession process. But on their own, they are not enough. To unlock this potential, and actually make change happen (and stick), these leaders will also need to score highly in the following areas:

Self-knowledge: knowing one’s own strengths and limitations

Values and aspirations: a clear sense of one’s own morals, motivations and ambitions

Wider impact and legacy: being able to look beyond oneself to one’s impact on the world

It is these capabilities that allow leaders to adapt, flex and grow along with their role, to hold on to a sense of direction amidst setbacks, and to operate effectively in first-time conditions.

These attributes are difficult to measure via resumes or interviews, which is why we developed our Leadership Portrait approach to executive assessment. It’s a way of looking at both a leader’s ability to succeed in the role as it is today, as well as their ability to lead the organization through the inevitable change and transformation that sits on the horizon.

Internal vs external

The next question is, where do you find these change-ready leaders? Should you be looking for someone external with experience of tech transformation and an outsider’s fresh perspective? Or should you be looking within your own ranks, for an insider who knows your business story and culture?

Option one: the outsider

Recently, we’ve seen a number of wealth management boards appointing CEOs from outside the industry, such as insurance, asset management and banking. They’re choosing CEOs with prior experience of the tech transformation journey who can guide them towards a more multi-channel future.

A few years ago, many boards would have shied away from hiring a CEO who didn’t fit the traditional mold for wealth management, for fear of upsetting the front office and losing key relationship managers. Now, they’re realising they need to be braver, because if they don’t evolve, their organizations will be left behind.

But the competition for CEOs is fierce, especially from the banks themselves, who have their own wealth management divisions, which they see as key future growth engines—and they’re doing everything in their power to attract (and retain) the best leaders.

As a result of this heightened competition, we’re starting to see more companies taking a more proactive approach to CEO succession planning. Rather than waiting for the current CEO to resign to trigger a search, they’re continually scanning the market and getting to know the top leadership talent across the ecosystem, even without a specific mandate. So, when the time comes to have that conversation, it’ll be a warm rather than a cold one.

Option two: the insider

While it may seem the obvious thing to hire a CEO with advanced technology capability to lead you through a tech transformation, it isn’t necessarily the best option.

Internal hires bring a deep understanding of the company’s culture. They know which levers to pull, where resistance might emerge, and how decisions really get made.

Our research shows senior wealth managers possess many positive attributes that set them apart from other financial services leaders:

01. They are empathetic. They have a real desire to do the right thing for both their clients and colleagues.

02. They’re commercially minded. They’re fiercely commercial and keen to make financially sound decisions.

03. They’re collaborative and extroverted. They are magnetic, energetic and good with people.

Taken together, their cultural fluency and modern leadership attributes allow them to navigate transformation initiatives with sensitivity—and potentially avoid some of the missteps that might derail external leaders early on.

There is a risk that while internally sourced CEOs may bring understanding and credibility, they can also struggle to challenge business-as-usual. As one wealth management CEO told us, “There’s lots of talent and innovation in wealth management businesses. The challenge is structuring our organization in a way that enables these individuals to shine and challenge the status quo.”

So, while we’re seeing more companies taking on CEOs from other industries, we’re also seeing more companies doing a lot more to develop their existing leaders through assessment, top team effectiveness, coaching, and mentoring.

The shortlists for external CEOs are getting shorter. So, if you can develop and crucially, retain the leadership talent within your own firm, it can be hugely valuable in the long-term.

Parting thoughts

Whether insider or outsider, the search for your next CEO needs to start now. It’s time to stop thinking of succession planning as a periodic, standalone process and start seeing it as an ongoing, never-ending story that includes scanning the market and using assessment, coaching, and mentoring to develop and retain your existing leadership bench. Having robust succession plans that start years in advance will give your next CEO the time to develop the skills they’re going to need in the future.

The good news is that many senior managers already possess the very skills tomorrow’s CEO will need. And there’s a strong, healthy pipeline of up and coming talent in the industry at increasingly senior levels. The goal is to spot, nurture and develop those next-generation leaders today.

Authors

Laetitia Jerabek is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Wealth Management and Banking & Lending Practices. She is based in London.

CEO Succession: A Never-Ending Story

Download full article

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices