Why Organizational Inertia Is Killing Your Transformation—And What to Do About It | Russell Reynolds associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Why Organizational Inertia Is Killing Your Transformation—And What to Do About It

Technology and InnovationTransformation and Innovation

Article

October 24, 2025

8 min

Technology and InnovationTransformation and Innovation

Executive Summary

We share the three distinct types of inertia holding your organization back from successful transformation.

Close

Bob Marcus

New York

Sean Dineen

Boston

Even we were surprised when our recent research into transformational leadership found that nearly three in four business executives believe their organizations will cease to exist in the next decade without fundamental transformation. The urgency around fundamental change within companies is now at a fever pitch.

There isn’t an industry we can name that isn’t experiencing significant disruption. But no matter how clear the marketplace or customers make the case for transformation, moving an enterprise from one state of being to another is an enormous challenge. Our research of over 1,000 CEOs, C-suite executives and next-generation leaders found that 71% indicated only low to moderate success in their organization’s transformation efforts. Though they aren’t reporting that their transformation is an outright failure, these leaders are missing significant opportunities.

From our experience in supporting CEOs and C-suite leaders in creating intentional and meaningful change inside complex systems, we often see that the key barriers to transformation are not always identified or addressed. Most leaders understand the need to communicate their vision, devise and cascade their strategies, and look to evolve the operating system to support the new approaches to winning in the marketplace. But too many leaders fail to identify and overcome what we call organizational inertia.

Isaac Newton’s First Law of Motion (sometimes called the Law of Inertia) is that a body in motion will remain in motion unless acted upon by an outside force. Every human system, whether a business, team, organization, or institution, has a way of being. Think of it as the status quo or the way things are done around here. Changing how things are won’t just happen because the CEO says it should. And often, the longer an enterprise has been stable and the more successful it’s been, the more that inertia will hamper any change effort. Human beings are comfortable in the familiar, the tried and true even when they are based on assumptions or realities that are no longer true.

The three types of inertia holding your organization back

Organizational inertia presents itself in three distinct forms—each requiring a different approach to overcome.

1. Insight inertia: Seeing the need

68%

of leaders cited insight inertia as a primary barrier to change.

Insight inertia is a lack of awareness—or unwillingness to accept—that things need to change. Our research revealed that 68% of leaders whose organizations had not transformed in the past five years indicated that insight was the primary barrier to change. All successful transformation efforts begin with a felt-need for change.

This idea, that the forces for change must be stronger than the natural resistance to it and that the people in a system must understand that change is necessary, traces its roots to the work of Kurt Lewin, the German-American social and organizational psychologist. Short-term mindsets, lack of a perceived need, and comfort with status quo performance all conspire to prevent transformation initiatives from getting off the ground.

Jack Welch, the legendary CEO of GE, used to tell his senior leaders that they needed to continually talk about the case for change until they were tired of hearing their own voice. It is not a one-and-done message, but something that needs to be repeated incessantly or people will go back to the place they’re comfortable. As David Ricks, CEO and Chair of Eli Lilly & Company, observed in our research: “Many change initiatives don’t fail because of some dramatic revolt—they fade away due to boredom. It’s not that the idea is wrong; it’s just that over time, people lose interest.”

The headwaters of all successful transformation is an organization awakened to the need for change. That means you have to be sure that senior leadership is aligned and speaking with one voice around the case for change. Transformational leadership requires consistent messaging and action. Without a clear, cogent, and compelling message about why standing still is not an option and why change will create a better future, leaders can find themselves surrounded by people who value the comfort and safety of the familiar even when it’s anything but.

2. Psychological inertia: The comfort of status quo

87%

of leaders cited psychological inertia as a main barrier to success while undergoing transformation.

Psychological inertia anchors people into the familiar. For employees and leaders to adopt new mindsets and behaviors, they must accept that the way they’ve always done things must change. This can create a cognitive dissonance for individuals, teams, and organizations, as the message they are receiving is that the practices and approaches that made them successful in the past must evolve. This can pose a threat to professional identities and raise uncomfortable questions about past decisions. Among organizations already undergoing transformation, 87% of leaders in our research cited psychological inertia as a main barrier to success.

Frans van Houten, former CEO of Royal Philips shared his firsthand experience of this in our research: “People will cling onto what they have or had. A lot of our people were survivors in the company—they had mastered the art of surviving previous leaders and restructurings. This creates a layer of passive resistance that must be tackled to succeed with transformation.”

When we think of resistance to change, we often think of it as open rebellion, but the truth is much more subtle. In launching transformation efforts, leaders will often be met with nodding heads and supportive words from the people around them. But even those employees that understand that things must change can struggle to fully embrace new ways of working—engaging cautiously rather than committing wholeheartedly to the transformation agenda.

3. Action inertia: The gap between intention and execution

87%

of leaders cited action inertia as a major challenge during transformation.

Even when leaders recognize the need for change and emotionally commit to it, a third form of inertia can emerge. Action inertia was cited by 87% of leaders as a major challenge encountered during transformation efforts. This form or inertia manifests as an inability to take and sustain the actions required to intentionally change things.

The way things are done—routines, rituals, processes, operating and governance models—are often deeply embedded in an organization. The formal and informal ways of working were designed or adapted to fit the business of yesterday, not tomorrow. Over time, they are calcified by habit and entrenched by mythology—the way we do things has made us successful. But when the need for transformation requires different choices, new strategies and structures, these ways of working can quickly breakdown and become a serious drag on progress and creating the necessary momentum for change.

As marketplace disruption increases, business leaders are being forced to be more deliberative in their choices about where to play and how to win. This frequently requires a focus on building new, future-ready capabilities. Inevitably, this creates the need for different approaches to resource allocation, increasing productivity, and squeezing costs from some parts of the business while investing more in the high-growth opportunities. The faster pace of the market is forcing many organizations to shift time and energy from long-range planning to short-term navigation, requiring a change to their operating model and leadership architecture.

Thomas Dannenfeldt, former Chair of Ceconomy AG, captured the complexity of this in our research: “Placing the right people and enabling them to succeed is a challenge. It’s essential for everyone to recognize that it’s not a matter of choosing between speed and synergy but rather achieving both—while always keeping the central focus on putting customers first. Understanding people and how to enable them to work effectively is the most complex aspect of transformation.”

It’s critical for transformational leaders to recognize the knock-on effects that alterations in direction and strategy have on a complex system. Genuine transformation requires a comprehensive understanding of how a system operates and a methodical approach to identifying what must change downstream from strategy. It’s a process of decoding the organization and figuring out how to rewire it to ensure that any gap between intentions and results is closed, that any action inertia is addressed.

Transformational leadership

Just as it exists as part of the natural world, inertia is a feature of every human system, especially ones that have enjoyed success. As such, it needs to be anticipated, understood, and respected. By identifying the three types—insight, psychological, and action—as they manifest in your organization, you’ll have the opportunity to create effective approaches to addressing them.

In our highly disruptive world, transformational leadership is increasingly becoming a prerequisite for business success. Lewin famously stated that to understand something you have to try to change it. Spend time by understanding the human and organizational dynamics that you are operating within including how inertia shows up in your team or business. Given the formidable and consistent challenges posed by organizational inertia, leaders ignore it at their peril.

To learn more about how to overcome inertia and drive meaningful change in your organization, download our Transformational Leadership report.

Authors

Bob Marcus is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in New York.
Sean Dineen is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Leadership Advisory practice. He is based in Boston.

Transformational Leadership Study

The leadership needed to overcome organizational inertia and create real transformation.

Download full report

Technology and InnovationTransformation and InnovationLeadershipHealthcareTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersAssessment and BenchmarkingDevelopment and TransitionExecutive Search

Integrating the Digital Functions with the Business

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices