Rewriting the Playbook: Leading Through Compounding Uncertainty | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Rewriting the Playbook: Leading Through Compounding Uncertainty

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesGrowth and ScalingConsumerArtificial Intelligence

Article

+ 1 author

October 13, 2025

12 min

Industry TrendsLeadership StrategiesGrowth and ScalingConsumerArtificial Intelligence

Executive Summary

Consumer leaders face compounding uncertainty. Our research shows how they adapt, innovate, and lead through new complexity.

Close

Rhys Grossman

London

Dick Patton

Boston

Andrew Hayes

Houston
New York

Norm Yustin

Chicago

Jump To:

INTRODUCTION

SITUATIONAL LEADERSHIP

CRITICAL CAPABILITIES

TEAM DYNAMICS

DON'T TOSS YOUR PLAYBOOK

Today’s consumer leaders around the world are navigating a new kind of complexity. They are expected to lead in an arena where the rules of the game are changing, but no one is quite sure what the new rules are.

AI is redefining how work gets done and transforming customer engagement. Consumer expectations are evolving faster than business models can adapt. Armed with real-time data from AI and smartphones, consumers are making quicker, more informed purchase decisions, accelerating shifts in behavior. At the same time, long-standing industry assumptions — from sourcing strategies to margin structures — are being upended by disruptions such as shifting government agendas.

Disruptions no longer come in waves — they compound. Economic, social, technological, political and consumer behavior shifts are accelerating simultaneously, creating an environment that is harder to predict, plan for, and lead through. In this environment, legacy playbooks are evolving. And the very definition of what “good leadership” looks like is shifting.

"Previously, you had a playbook and you played it. It’s completely different today. The old playbook doesn’t work anymore"

Jon Moeller
Chairman, President & CEO, Procter & Gamble

Of course, no consumer leader has ever led in a time of perfect certainty — volatility has long been part of the job. But today’s environment is different. The scale, speed, and interconnectedness of today’s challenges are pushing leadership into uncharted territory and reshaping expectations of what successful leadership looks like. Yet many leaders stress that volatility is not necessarily a constraint — it is also a catalyst and an opportunity, accelerating innovation, sharpening priorities, and deepening focus on customers.

"Volatility is not a barrier; it’s a forcing function for innovation, agility, and a closer connection to our most important asset: our customers."

Alexis Nasard
CEO, Swarovski

To help consumer leaders navigate what’s to come, our research draws on in-depth conversations with sixty-five consumer leaders — from CEOs and C-suite executives to board directors across the US, Europe and Asia, representing organizations that range from the world’s largest consumer conglomerates to fast-growing challenger brands – exploring how they’re responding to compounding uncertainty.

Why situational leadership has never been more critical

We have identified five shifts that are making the role of the consumer leader more critical than ever. Each shift brings new and often competing demands — forcing leaders to flex between styles, adjust their decision-making approach, and practice situational leadership.

From independent to intertwined issues

What used to be isolated disruptions are now overlapping and compounding — turning complexity into something systemic. Consumer leaders aren’t just solving one challenge at a time; they’re navigating the ripple effects as each issue impacts the next.

Geopolitical developments are triggering regulatory shifts that are directly impacting supply chains, cost structures, and sourcing strategies. What starts as a supply chain issue quickly becomes a pricing challenge, then a brand trust issue. Growing pressure, shifting priorities, and a rising risk of burnout can challenge talent retention.

From transformation to radical disruption

Issues with the power to fundamentally reshape industries are appearing and taking hold with unprecedented speed. Tariffs and supply chain volatility can destabilize sourcing strategies overnight, forcing margin resets and, in some cases, threatening entire business models.

"Tariffs, rising costs, franchisee response – all of this compounds under the banner of uncertainty.”

Chris Kempczinski
Chairman & CEO, McDonalds; Board Director, Procter & Gamble

Artificial intelligence is simultaneously redefining how consumer industries operate and how customers interact with businesses. It is not just enhancing workflows — it is rewriting them. Large retailers are piloting AI agents to run category management, automate pricing, and soon AI is expected to be able to negotiate directly with suppliers. The result is an uneven playing field: data-rich retailers with higher capital investment are racing ahead, while smaller retailers and CPGs risk being left behind. But the real frontier isn’t AI alone — it’s how human judgment and AI capabilities combine.

"AI will transform marketing because it will transform everything — from innovation to content creation to demand generation. But what won’t change is what makes a great brand: solving real pain points with innovation and creativity, bringing everyday joy – that should still be about EI, not AI."

Samir Singh
EVP APAC, Colgate-Palmolive

"The greatest fuel for AI is data. If you have the best data, then you have the right to win in AI."

Stuart Aitken
CEO, Circana

And layered on top of these shifts, consumer behaviors themselves continue to evolve in ways that make it hard for leaders to keep pace. From the rise of GLP-1 drugs in the US, to TikTok Shop in Asia, to European consumers placing greater value on products being local, leaders around the globe are being forced to adapt in real time.

Russell Reynolds Associates’ Global Leadership Monitor shows that consumer behavior remains the most significant external factor shaping the health of consumer organizations — influencing what consumers value, how they shop, and the experiences they expect.

“Staying in tune with evolving consumer behavior is essential for CPG leaders, especially in the current dynamic operating environment. As consumers become increasingly deliberate in their choices, we must be equally intentional in our decision making.”

Mick Beekhuizen
President and CEO, The Campbell’s Company

From single to multiple time horizons

Consumer leaders today are being pulled in two directions simultaneously: the urgency of short-term delivery and the pressure to build long-term resilience. While managing costs, protecting margins, and hitting quarterly targets remain essential, so too is investing in the capabilities and strategies that will secure relevance five years out.

Performance used to be about delivering results in order to earn the right to transform. Today, transformation itself is table stakes, and success is defined by the ability to adapt continuously along the way. Every short-term move carries long-term consequences, making prioritization across issues like tariffs and AI increasingly complex. At the same time, boards are pressing CEOs to move faster, be more decisive and place the right strategic bets to secure the company’s future.

“Delivering short-term goals is always challenging.  However, the newer and added challenge is navigating increased uncertainty.  Leaders are having to fire fight more often and deal with a wide range of issues related to shifting trade policies, accelerating health and wellness trends and regulatory changes.”

Brendan Foley
President & CEO, McCormick

From unitary and aligned expectations to plural and polarized ones

Today’s leaders are being held accountable to a broader and more vocal group of stakeholders than ever before — from shareholders and customers to regulators, employees, and the public. These stakeholders often have divergent, even conflicting, priorities. And in some markets, the challenge is magnified by local politics and regulations that are moving in opposite directions.

Expectations around issues like DE&I now vary not only across continents, but even from state to state within the U.S. What’s standard in one region may be politically charged in another, forcing leaders to make judgment calls that will inevitably draw criticism — no matter what side they take.

For some CEOs, this means spending more time in policy and government conversations than ever before — engaging directly with lawmakers to share their perspectives and manage emerging risks.

"I’m spending more time in DC and Brussels, working at different levels to flag potential implications of decisions — more so than in the past."

Carlos Abrams-Rivera
CEO, Kraft Heinz

From a vertical to a horizontal presentation

The forces reshaping consumer  businesses rarely sit neatly within one function. Retail media is a prime example: now surpassing $100 billion globally, it is reshaping how brands engage with consumers. For leaders, this means not only adapting to new business models, but also competing on new terms and with new capabilities required to succeed.

Once seen primarily as a marketing function, retail media now touches merchandising, data analytics, supply chain, finance, and customer engagement. For example, allocating in-store space for digital screens requires coordination between operations, IT, brand partnerships, and finance.

AI is another prime example – capturing its potential is not just a technical exercise, but a cultural and organizational one. Questions of ethics, safety, and new models of work demand collaboration across teams and functions, requiring leaders to work with one another in ways many top teams were never designed to do.

"Projects are increasingly more cross-functional and require a deeper level of coordination and communication."

Sean Gamble
President & CEO, Cinemark

What today’s environment demands of consumer leaders

To address these shifts, consumer leaders have had to evolve their leadership playbooks. Interviews revealed four capabilities that help successful leaders navigate compounding uncertainty with ease:

01

Act or get left behind

Amid today’s volatility, waiting for certainty or trying to control all of the workstreams means missing the moment. Leadership today is less about having all the answers and more about acting with conviction, taking informed risks when visibility is limited, and making decisions with the best information available. As conditions evolve, it also requires the flexibility and adaptability to adjust course as new information emerges. That means moving directionally, if not always precisely.

"We learn more from failures than from successes, yet many people leave that powerful lesson at home when they come to work. Our goal is to empower employees to take calculated risks."

Tony Capuano
President & CEO, Marriott; Board Director, McDonald’s

02

Communicate (even if you don’t have all the answers)

Since COVID, the demand for clear, consistent communication has only grown — not just with employees, but with their teams, boards and external stakeholders. This year has underscored that successful leadership through uncertainty is less about having every answer and more about reassuring, projecting calm and confidence, and providing clarity on direction, even when that is just acknowledging what is still being worked through.

"In tougher and uncertain times, it’s important to show both heart and presence. I make a point of spending extra time with the team as a group, so they know where we stand together — reducing uncertainty and enabling smart and bold decisions."

Stina Westerstad
CEO, BabyBjörn

03

Embrace scenario planning as a leadership “workout”

In today’s environment, leaders are under pressure to make faster decisions and shift course quickly. To enable that pace, many are using scenario planning not as a theoretical tool, but as a practical way to test responses, align decision-makers, and stay ready. The goal isn’t to predict what’s next — it’s to “build a muscle” to move quickly without losing focus.

"Scenario planning is like warming up in a sport. Practice enough to get your mind in shape for whatever comes your way and to build the confidence you can perform."

Maria Henry
Board Director, Nike and General Mills

"To face uncertainty, you must identify the certainties within the uncertainty."

Henry Chen
CEO, Sanyuan Group

04

Align your organization around a North Star

Pressure from investors and shareholders to deliver short-term results can tempt leaders to compromise on the principles that underpin long-term success. The most effective resist that pull, using their company’s mission and values as a filter for decisions, a source of stability for their teams, and a guide through tough trade-offs. Protecting purpose now – even when it requires harder calls – positions the company to come out stronger as conditions improve.

"The challenge is staying true to your company’s purpose when there’s pressure for short-term results. You have to hold the line now so you can emerge stronger when conditions improve."

Scott Boatwright
CEO, Chipotle

Team cohesion is critical to success in this environment

Leadership has become a team sport more than ever. No matter how experienced or visionary, no leader can navigate today’s complexity alone. The most effective leaders are building empowered and aligned teams that can move quickly and with autonomy, investing in how the team works and how decisions are made:

01. Finding the right rhythm as a team

Many of today’s strongest leadership teams were forged in crisis. What distinguishes them isn’t just pace, but rhythm that works for them as a team: regular check-ins, clarity around priorities, and space for honest debate. That rhythm allows teams to operate with urgency, without chaos, while also building in time to recharge so they can sustain performance and avoid burnout.

"We operate in a series of sprints, driven by action, accountability, and autonomy, and then move to the next sprint. We are making sure to measure our sprints, especially their intensity, and buffer in recovery so our team has time to recharge."

Joe Preston
President & CEO, New Balance

High-performing teams also know when to pull together and when to give space. They balance deep collaboration with empowering individual leaders to stay connected to their own functions and teams. The goal isn’t constant coordination, but deliberate connection — creating the conditions for both speed and influence.

" Ultimately, I’m leading the people who lead the business. Leadership is about setting compelling strategic direction and the why of the work, it is clearly about results leadership. But, the real unlock to impact at scale is in leading the leaders."

Shane Grant
COO Americas, Colgate-Palmolive

02. Enterprise-wide thinking

The most effective leaders see their executive team—not their functions—as their true first team. Rather than defending silos, they lean into horizontal collaboration, recognizing that the company succeeds only when the leadership body operates as one. Enterprise-minded leaders bring their expertise to enrich collective judgment, not to accumulate personal power.

"The real goal is to have a ‘one demand team’ with a growth mindset. If I’m in supply chain, I don’t say, ‘R&D isn’t my job.’ Instead, I ask: how can our production lines create new products or unlock cost savings?"

Carl Su
Managing Director China, General Mills

03. Make the board part of the leadership rhythm

Increased uncertainty has drawn boards closer to the business. The days of quarterly updates are over; boards are now actively engaged in decision-making cycles. That means executive teams need to align not just internally, but across governance lines, bringing boards in early as decisions are being made and preparing them to respond quickly when needed. Keeping the board connected to important decisions helps build directors’ confidence in how events are unfolding.

" As you navigate uncertainly, it’s important to bring the board along with you without making them feel as if they need to be the ones managing the company."

Jeff Harmening
Chairman & CEO, General Mills

04. Lean into the competitive spirit

The market environment is not only a test of resilience, but also a catalyst for performance. Success comes not from resisting uncertainty, but from embracing it. Leaders who treat disruption as fuel can ignite their organizations — sharpening focus, fueling a competitive edge, and turning pressure into momentum. This mindset transforms volatility from a risk to be managed into an arena for growth, where organizations strengthen operational discipline, accelerate innovation, and build cultures energized by challenge.

Don't toss your playbook; actively seek to evolve it

The strategies and instincts that once defined success can quickly become liabilities if left unquestioned. In today’s environment, established patterns are not always reliable.

Organizations that master compounding uncertainty move beyond simply adapting to change – they begin creating it. They don't wait for market shifts to force adaptation, they stay intentional about challenging long-held assumptions and creating new, evolved playbooks.

To close each conversation, we asked our interviewees: What’s the best advice you’ve ever received, that feels especially relevant right now? Here’s what they shared:

“We can make this as stressful and as challenging as we want but, ultimately, we have a strategy and a plan. Stay calm and stay focused to run the play.”

Kara Trent

President, Americas, Under Armour

“No one is brilliant, and no one is terrible — the reality is usually somewhere in the middle.”

Peter Duffy

CEO, MONY Group

“Talk to others and leverage a wide network to gather additional sources of inspiration.”

Sean Gamble

CEO, Cinemark

“Make the best decision with the information you have today. If we need to change tomorrow, then we can do that.”

Ron Ostrowski

CEO, Rawlings Sporting Goods

“Focus on your key topics and simplify your business. Repeatedly do the right thing.”

David Zhang

Managing Director, China Ferrero

“The consumer will never give you the answer. They will give you the insight that leads to the answer.”

Aaron Powell

CEO, Pizza Hut (Yum! Brands)

“Be open minded and apply common sense, especially after the decision-making process.”

Jaime Ramirez

CEO, Fluidra; Board Director, Kimberly-Clark Corporation

“Invite innovation from across the business—including junior levels.”

Andrew Swinand

CEO, Inspired Thinking

“Accept the things you cannot change, have the courage to change the things you can, and the wisdom to know the difference.”

Nathan Coe

CEO, Autotrader

“Listening is key, especially now. Use your ears and your mouth in the ratio you've got them.”

Jack Sinclair

CEO, Sprouts Farmers Market

Authors

Rhys Grossman leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector and Consumer Digital practice globally. He is based in London.

Dick Patton leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer sector in the Americas. He is based in Boston.

Andrew Hayes leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ CPG practice globally. He is jointly based in New York and Houston.

Norm Yustin leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Retail practice globally. He is based in Chicago.

Aleksandra Zacharova leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Commercial Strategy and Insights team. She is based in London.

Peter Carlson is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Commercial Strategy and Insights team. He is based in Boston.

Alex Madronal is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Consumer Commercial Strategy and Insights team. He is based in Boston.

The authors wish to thank the 65 leaders from RRA’s global network who participated in this year’s RRA Leadership Labs interviews!

Aaron Powell,
CEO, Pizza Hut (Yum! Brands)

Alidad Moghaddam,
CEO, Blue Light Card

Alexis Nasard,
CEO, Swarovski

Andrew Swinand,
CEO, Inspired Thinking

Betsy Frost,
CEO, Q Mixers

Brendan Foley,
President & CEO, McCormick; Board Director, Fortune Brands Innovations Inc.

Brett Schulman,
CEO, CAVA

Brian Kocher,
CEO, SunOpta

Carl Su,
Managing Director, China, General Mills

Carlos Abrams-Rivera,
CEO, Kraft Heinz

Chris Kempczinski,
Chairman & CEO, McDonald's; Board Director Procter & Gamble

Christophe Beck,
CEO, EcoLabs

Christoper Englinde,
Former CEO, Brothers; NewLook; H&M

Dave Burwick,
CEO, Spindrift

David Boone,
CEO, Michaels Stores

David Schelp,
Board Director, TUI

David Zhang,
Managing Director, China Ferrero

Francis Kint,
CEO, Greenyard

Fredrik Palm,
Former CEO, currently board professional and investor, Desenio

Gary Chen,
CEO, Gentspace

Heath Golden,
CEO, Marquee Brands

Heather Neary,
CEO, Taco Johns

Henry Chen,
CEO, Sanyuan Group

Jack Sinclair,
CEO, Sprout's Farmers Market

Jaime Ramirez,
CEO, Fluidra; Board Director, Kimberly-Clark Corporation

James O’Reilly,
CEO, Ascent Hospitality Management

Jean-David Schwarz,
CEO, Yves Rocher Group

Jeff Harmening,
Chairman & CEO, General Mills

Joe Preston,
President & CEO, New Balance

John Culver,
Board Director, Kimberly-Clark and Columbia Sportswear

Jon Moeller,
Chairman, President & CEO, Procter & Gamble

Jon Nudi,
CEO, Masco

Jonas Karlén,
Former CEO, Adlibris

Kara Trent,
President, Americas, Under Armour

Marc Rosen,
CEO, Catalyst Brands

Maria Henry,
Board Director, Nike and General Mills

Marcos Samaha,
CEO, Tenda Acatado

Mark Smucker,
CEO, JM Smucker

Mercedes Abramo,
CEO, North America, Ralph Lauren

Michael Jiang,
President, China, Zespri

Mick Beekhuizen,
President and CEO, The Campbell’s Company

Nathan Coe,
CEO, Autotrader

Nicholas Fink,
CEO, Fortune Brands

Noel Wallace,
Chairman, President, & CEO of Colgate-Palmolive

Oliver Strelecki,
CEO, Cofresco

Peter Duffy,
CEO, Mony Group

Piet Sanders,
CEO, What’s Cooking

Rich Cacapolo,
CEO, DMGT

Robbert Rietbroek,
CEO, Primo Brands

Ron Ostrowski,
CEO, Rawlings Sporting Goods

Samir Singh,
EVP APAC, Colgate-Palmolive

Scott Boatwright,
CEO, Chipotle

Sean Connolly,
CEO, Conagra

Sean Gamble,
President & CEO, Cinemark

Shane Grant,
COO Americas, Colgate-Palmolive

Shirley Xue,
CEO China, Beiersdorf

Skip Bourdo,
CEO, Neighbourly Pharmacy

Soren Bjorn,
CEO, Driscoll's

Stephanie Hoppe,
VP, Omnichannel Marketing, Casey's

Stina Westerstad,
CEO, BabyBjörn

Stuart Aitken,
CEO, Circana

Tim Cofer,
CEO, Keurig Dr Pepper

Tony Capuano,
President & CEO, Marriott; Board Director, McDonald’s

Vanny Wang,
Managing Director, China, Tang You Bao Bao

Yuri Hermida,
CEO, Sauer Brands

Rewriting the Playbook: Leading Through Compounding Uncertainty

DOWNLOAD THE FULL ARTICLE

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerAssessment and Benchmarking

Addressing a Disenfranchised and Disconnected C-suite

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices