Five CHRO Talent Trends in India | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

Five CHRO Talent Trends in India

Leadership StrategiesSuccessionPortfolio Company LeadershipC-Suite SuccessionExecutive Search

Article

September 22, 2025

9 min

Leadership StrategiesSuccessionPortfolio Company LeadershipC-Suite SuccessionExecutive Search

Executive summary

The battle for CHRO talent in India is fierce, but there are overlooked talent pools. Here’s how to secure the high performer you need.

Close

Karan Bahl

Mumbai
New Delhi

Vinita Katara

Mumbai
New Delhi

The role of chief human resources officer (CHRO) has undergone a profound transformation in India over the past decade. Once viewed as someone who oversaw routine employment matters, today’s CHROs are increasingly strategic partners shaping business outcomes and influencing culture across the organization. With India’s unique demographic divide, growing digital adoption, and emerging talent hubs, organizations are redefining their expectations for a CHRO.

In turn, the battle for CHRO talent in the country is intensifying. As Russell Reynolds Associates analyzed the CHRO turnover in the country, meaningful trends emerged:

Companies are increasingly looking for experienced CHROs, as they need the person to make an immediate impact.

Organizations are getting more creative when seeking to fill their HR leadership positions, with many looking beyond their immediate sector for talent.

But companies are overlooking talent pools—including potential internal successors—and very few are actively planning for CHRO succession.

Methodology

We drew on these data sources:

Russell Reynolds’ July 2025 analysis of the cohort of CHROs at the BSE 100 companies .

The global Russell Reynolds’ CHRO Turnover Index, which analyzes major indices across the world every quarter. This research includes the Nifty 50 companies in India.

#1 High CHRO turnover means a fierce battle for talent

In 2024, 27% of BSE 100 companies appointed a new CHRO—more than three times the global average of 8% reported in our Global CHRO Turnover Index.

For companies that are hiring, that means intense competition for top talent, particularly seasoned CHROs. More than half the CHROs in the BSE 100 have changed jobs in the past 3.5 years, while 13% have been in their positions for over 7.5 years and are deeply embedded in their organizations (see figure 1).

That leaves fewer than one-third of CHROs in the sweet spot of roughly four to seven years’ tenure—experienced enough to add value quickly, and also potentially open to a move. The pool of candidates both qualified and willing to change companies is therefore far smaller than during periods of lower turnover.

Figure 1: Tenure of current BSE 100 CHROs

Source: RRA analysis of BSE 100 companies, July 2025. N = 100.

#2 India’s biggest companies favor external hires, further fuelling the talent war

India’s largest companies tend to look outside for a top HR leader. Fifty-three percent of sitting CHROs in the BSE 100 came from outside the company, and in recent years, external hires have consistently outnumbered internal appointments (see figure 2).

Figure 2: Internal vs external CHRO hires in BSE 100 since 2022

Source: RRA analysis of BSE 100 companies, July 2025. N = 100.

That makes the hunt for an experienced external CHRO even more challenging: Few are in the market, and the demand for them is intense.

#3 Internal successors are an overlooked talent pool in India’s biggest companies

BSE 100 companies are less likely than global peers to appoint a first-time CHRO from within their organization. In 2024, only 33% of CHRO appointments in the BSE 100 fit this profile, compared with 40% globally (see figure 3).

When compared with global trends, BSE 100 companies are appointing far more external CHROs—56% in 2024, compared with just 39% globally (see figure 3). The inclination for external hires suggests that many BSE 100 companies may be overlooking talent in their own ranks. Strengthening succession processes, being proactive in developing high-potential talent and using assessment tools to gauge leadership potential all can help companies confidently appoint an internal candidate as a first-time  CHRO.

Figure 3: Profile of CHROs appointed in 2024

Source: CHRO Turnover Index 2024, global n = 1822, BSE 100 n = 100.

#4 Seventy-six percent of BSE 100 CHROs are men, indicating another overlooked source of talent — women

Three in four CHROs in the BSE 100 are men (76%). That is striking for this role, as many global markets show almost the opposite, with women in the majority. The most recent cohort of appointees shows the trend continuing, with 81% of CHROs named in 2024 and all appointments so far in 2025 being men  (see figure 4).

Figure 4: CHROs appointed in 2024 by gender

Source: CHRO Turnover Index 2024, global n = 1822, BSE 100 n = 100.

The untapped pool of potential women CHROs could intensify  competition for CHRO talent. Taking advantage of this opportunity requires much the same approach as developing internal talent: identifying a pipeline of high-potential people, regardless of gender, nurturing them, and ensuring they are exposed to the enterprise-level issues they would face in the top job. Those steps all will help prepare the next generation of leaders.

#5 Sectors have different preferences

Consumer companies in India appoint slightly more CHROs with experience beyond just that sector (see figure 5). Such companies also are balanced between internal and external appointments to CHRO (see figure 6). In India, external CHROs in this sector tend to come from healthcare and financial services.

Financial services CHROs are much more likely to have worked only in that sector (see figure 5). That might be in part because CHROs for such organizations need experience in both heavily regulated environments and services-oriented businesses, shrinking the available talent pool. Because almost half of financial services CHROs in India (47%) come from outside the organization, talent benches are vulnerable to approaches from competitors (see figure 6).

Healthcare companies in India prefer CHROs with multi-sector experience and almost always hire externally for the position (see figures 5 and 6). The sector has tended to lag others in adopting best-in-class HR practices and technology, resulting in weaker bench strength, as the highest-potential people leave for other industries. Therefore, it makes sense to look for top CHRO talent from outside the sector who can bring best practices and a fresh perspective. In particular, there’s a trend for healthcare companies to hire CHROs from the consumer businesses.

Industrial and natural resources companies tend to appoint CHROs with cross-sector experience and lean slightly toward external hires (see figures 5 and 6). This may reflect the fact that many industrial companies are increasing the services proportion of their revenues relative to manufacturing and thus need a CHRO with broader experience.

Technology companies are somewhat of an outlier in the BSE 100. They have the lowest proportion of CHROs with multi-sector experience and the lowest proportion of external hires (see figure 5 and 6). This might be in part because the sector is attractive—high growth, leading-edge technology and high reward all keep top talent engaged. HR roles tend to be very skewed toward talent acquisition, another possible reason that more CHROs are appointed from within. Fewer top HR leaders in other sectors have the same spike in experience in this area.

Figure 5: Sector experience of BSE 100 CHROs

Source: RRA analysis of BSE 100 companies, July 2025. N = 100.

Figure 6: % of sitting BSE 100 CHROs who are external hires

Source: RRA analysis of BSE 100 companies, July 2025. N = 100.

How to navigate the fiercely competitive CHRO talent pool

Strengthen succession planning by ensuring that high-potential talent gets a breadth of experience: Succession planning should begin as soon as a CHRO is appointed. To be effective, it requires a multi-year horizon, exposing high-potential talent to different areas. Our research shows that aspiring internal appointees are more likely to reach the top job if they gain broad experience.

In the BSE 100, 67% of CHROs progressed through wide-ranging HR roles, such as HR business partner or multiple-CEO  roles, while 15% advanced primarily from manufacturing, personnel management or other non-HR functions (see figure 7). This follows the global trend, which is even more pronounced: HR business partner is the most common role immediately before being appointed CHRO. Fifteen percent come from entirely different business units or C-suite roles.

At the level below, companies should ensure developmental pathways for HR talent, exposing them to a variety of aspects of the role, such as industrial relations, talent acquisition, compensation and benefits, HR operations, etc. This practice will make such talent more prepared as they are groomed for a CHRO role.

Figure 7: Route to the top path for BSE 100 CHROs

Source: RRA analysis of BSE 100 companies, July 2025. N = 100.

Be aware of sector trends in finding a CHRO: Sectors draw CHRO talent in different ways. For those where talent is scarce and limited—often because of a strong preference for hiring from within the same sector—succession planning needs to be proactive and longer-term to ensure that top talent can be developed and accessed. This is particularly important in sectors such as financial services and technology.

De-bias succession through assessment: India’s biggest companies may be overlooking significant talent pools, according to our research. Rigorous executive assessment tools can help remove bias from access to programs for high-potential people and ensure that selection processes are structured and objective for both internal and external candidates. Tools such as RRA’s Leadership Portrait assess candidates’ current readiness and future leadership potential, enabling companies to make decisions based on proven data, rather than instinct.

Consider ways to de-risk first-time CHROs: The preference for experienced CHROs is much stronger in the BSE 100 than in other global markets, indicating an aversion to appointing first-timers. Companies should consider what would increase their comfort with making such appointments. Robust transition planning, which helps both the company and the new CHRO feel more confident they will do well in the new role, starts long before the appointment. Other common steps include strengthening the team around a first-time CHRO, connecting them with external peer networks, and providing coaching and mentoring to help them land well in their elevated role.

Authors

Karan Bahl is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ HR and Healthcare team. He is based in Mumbai.
Alison Huntington leads Russell Reynolds Associates’ HR Officers Knowledge team. She is based in London.
Vinita Katara is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ HR and Financial Officers team. She is based in Mumbai.
Kayanush Patel is a member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ HR and Financial Officers team. She is based in Mumbai.

Technology and InnovationLeadership StrategiesLeadershipConsumerTechnology, Data, and Digital OfficersCulture AnalyticsExecutive Search

Becoming a Best-in-Class Digital Operator

Leadership StrategiesLeadershipIndustrialAssessment and BenchmarkingExecutive SearchTeam Performance

Building Top Team Cohesion and Performance

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices