How Do Boards Organize Themselves for CEO Succession Planning? | Russell Reynolds Associates

Search

Search

Menu

Menu Close

Capabilities

Expertise

Insights

About

Contact Us

en

Login

Back

Search

Succession

Performance

Accelerators

Transformation

Board

Executive Search

Our executive search consultants help you recruit great CEOs, CxOs, and board members in as little as 14 weeks.

Back

Industries

Functions

Organizations

Board & CEO Advisory

Is your board ready for what is next? We help boards and CEOs face the unprecedented challenges that shape our world—from disruptive technology to shifting demographics to pressure from investors and regulators.

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends

Leadership Labs

Flagship Research

Data and Indices

RRA Books

Events and Webcasts

Insights Library

Global CEO Turnover Index

We share the latest CEO turnover data across listed companies globally. Each quarter, you’ll find the proportion of CEO departures and appointments globally, as well as trends on CEO appointments by gender, tenure, and whether CEOs are internal or external hires.

Back

People

Who We Are

Careers

Newsroom

Consultant Directory

Meet the people behind Russell Reynolds Associates, building proactive relationships around the world and around the corner.

Back

Get In Touch

Advance Your Career

Join the Conversation

Find a Local Office

Request for Consultation

Complete the contact form and we will get back to you shortly. We look forward to connecting with you.

Back

Search Overview

Board Search

CEO Search

Executive Search

Back

Succession Overview

Board Succession

CEO Succession

C-suite Succession

Back

Performance Overview

Assessment & Benchmarking

Executive Development

Executive Transition

Team Performance

Back

Accelerators Overview

Executive Mentoring

RRA Artemis

Back

Transformation Overview

AI and Tech

Inclusion and Culture

Strategy Decode and Activation

Sustainability

Back

Board Overview

Board Composition

Board Effectiveness

Back

Industries Overview

Business & Professional Services

Consumer

Education

Financial Services

Healthcare

Industrial & Natural Resources

Private Capital

Technology

Back

Functions Overview

Boards

CEOs

Corporate Affairs & Communications

Customer Activation & Growth

Finance

Human Resources

Legal, Risk & Compliance

Operations & Supply Chain

Sustainability

Technology, Data & Digital

Back

Organizations Overview

Family Enterprise

Growth Tech

Private Capital

Social Impact

Back

Leadership Topics and Trends Overview

AI and Leadership

Board Leadership

Family Enterprise Leadership

Leadership Development

Leadership Transformation

Sustainable Leadership

Technology & Innovation

The Future of Leadership

Your Leadership Journey

Back

Leadership Labs Overview

Leadership Analytics: Predictors of CEO Success

Unusual Suspects: New Leadership Archetypes

AI Leadership, 100% Human

Back

Flagship Research Overview

Divides and Dividends on Sustainability

Leadership for a Decade of Action

Global Corporate Governance Trends

Transformational Leadership Study

Back

Data and Indices Overview

Global Leadership Monitor

Leadership Confidence Index

Global CEO Turnover Index

Global CFO Turnover Index

Global CHRO Turnover Index

Global COO Turnover Index

Back

RRA Books Overview

Book: The Catalyst CEO

Book: The New CEO

Book: To the Top

Book: Sustainable Leadership

Back

Events and Webcasts Overview

Podcast: Redefiners

Podcast: Leadership Lounge

Events and Webinars

Back

Insights Library Overview

Back

People Overview

Consultants

Leadership

Board of Directors

Office Locations

Back

Who We Are Overview

Sustainability

Responsible AI

Partnerships

History

Back

Careers Overview

Careers with our Clients

Careers at RRA

Back

Newsroom Overview

Back

Get In Touch Overview

Request Consultation

Subscribe to Newsletter

Access Events

Submit Media Inquiry

Back

Advance Your Career Overview

Start Career with our Clients

Join RRA

Back

Join the Conversation Overview

LinkedIn

X (formerly Twitter)

YouTube

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Back

Find a Local Office Overview

Americas

EMEA

Asia Pacific

Language

English

中文(中国)

日本語 (日本)

Login

Client Login

Candidate Portal

Login 4

Login 5

Login 6

Login 7

Login 8

Login 9

Login 10

How Do Boards Organize Themselves for CEO Succession Planning?

Board and CEO Advisory

Article

Dean Stamoulis

September 19, 2025

5 min

Board and CEO Advisory

Executive Summary

Here’s what directors should know about how their peers plan for CEO succession planning and whether to reassess their own processes.

Close

Dean Stamoulis

Atlanta

Reprinted with permission from the National Association of Corporate Directors after originally appearing as an online article on September 16, 2025.

Few corporate acts are more momentous than selecting a new CEO. Despite this being one of the board’s primary responsibilities, directors often lack insight into how their peers approach this critical task.

In fact, it is one of the most common questions posed to Russell Reynolds Associates when speaking with board leaders about CEO succession planning. Our research reveals one of the consequences of directors not knowing how to approach this effort, or what a “good” CEO succession practice look like: Only half of director respondents to the 2025 Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study report having the ability to appoint an internal successor if one was needed tomorrow.

The study asked more than 1,000 corporate directors to detail what really happens in their boardrooms. Recognizing that many directors serve on multiple boards, we asked each director to answer questions from the perspective of the board on which the individual has served the longest. For this year’s report, we asked directors who had been involved in a CEO succession planning effort at any point in time while on those boards to tell us about how their boards approached the task.

Below is what we learned about how boards approach CEO succession planning.

Organization and Leadership

Just as formal committee structures vary from board to board, so, too, does the way that boards organize themselves to approach the task of CEO succession planning. Data from the Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study report show that:

20 percent of respondents tackled succession at the full-board level, with all directors involved in the process;

17 percent established a special committee entirely focused on managing the CEO succession process; and

6 percent created an informal working group of directors.

When it came to leading the effort, 25 percent of respondents said that their independent board leaders (i.e., chair or lead independent director) spearheaded the effort, and another 25 percent turned to their nominating and governance committee chair.

When determining how to organize CEO succession planning efforts, and who to ask to take the lead, there is no one-size-fits-all solution. Board leaders should consider existing committee structures and whether there is an established committee that would logically be responsible and has the bandwidth to take on the work. Managing succession at the full board level is attractive for many reasons—not the least of which is that the full board will eventually have to vote on the decision—but it also requires directors who will engage at the right level and time, rather than overreaching and overcomplicating the process along the way.

Monitoring and Interviewing

One of the benefits of a robust, long-term CEO succession plan is that it creates optionality: The board can ideally choose between multiple great executives, all of whom could be expected to perform well in the role. If external candidates are considered, it gives directors a chance to benchmark internal talent against the external talent market. This can highlight internal candidate development gaps or provide confirmation that the internal candidate is the best one for the job.

Long-term CEO succession plans should ideally play out over three or more years, giving directors the opportunity to fully understand and evaluate the internal candidates. In fact, directors who report using a longer timeline for CEO succession planning are significantly more likely than directors using shorter timelines to report feeling as though they are adequately informed about internal candidates’ learning and development plans, and that they had adequate exposure to those internal candidates in the months leading up to their selection.

When it was time to make the final decision, directors reported considering a median of one internal candidate and two external candidates. Russell Reynolds Associates’ CEO Turnover Index data show that about 76 percent of incoming CEOs in the first half of 2025 were internal hires. This indicates that while more external candidates are considered for the role, boards are confident that their succession processes prepare internal candidates to succeed as CEO.

Looking Beyond the CEO

While CEO succession planning is a primary focus of the board, directors are increasingly showing interest in broader C-suite succession efforts. This occurs for multiple reasons: The people in C-suite roles are likely internal CEO successors and there is a growing recognition of the importance of a having an executive team that performs strongly.

It is no surprise, then, that the majority of respondents in the Board Culture and Director Behaviors Study reported that the board also looked at broader C-suite succession issues, either generally (27%) or for specific roles (51%), when undertaking CEO succession planning. Among the boards that looked at successors for specific executives’ roles, 75 percent looked at the chief financial officer, 55 percent looked at the chief operating officer, and 30 percent looked at the chief human resources officer.

The Importance of Early Action

Successful long-term CEO succession planning requires boards to identify the right organizational structure and leadership for their business context and culture, focus on impactful candidate development efforts with frequent monitoring, and establish a systematic process for internal and external candidate evaluation. When the board puts these pieces in place early in the process, it creates the conditions necessary for the selection of the right candidate and a smooth transition of the new CEO.

The views expressed in this article are the authors’ own and do not represent the perspective of NACD.

Russell Reynolds Associates is a NACD strategic content partner, providing directors with critical and timely information, and perspectives. Russell Reynolds Associates is a financial supporter of the NACD.

Authors

Dean Stamoulis is a senior member of Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners practice.
PJ Neal is the global head of operations for Russell Reynolds Associates’ Board and CEO Advisory Partners practice.

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Five Things the Strongest Boards Do Differently

Board Composition and SuccessionBoard and CEO AdvisoryBoard of DirectorsBoard Effectiveness

Pressure-Testing Your Board Evaluation

We and our partners use cookies and other technologies on this site to collect data about your device and activities on this site for operating and protecting the site, enabling and optimizing site functionality, analyzing site usage, personalizing your experience, and targeting ads, as detailed in our Cookie Policy. Click “Accept All” to consent to all of this, “Reject Optional Cookies” to get only mandatory cookies, or “Preferences” for more options.

Preferences
Reject Optional Cookies
Accept All

×

About Cookies

Cookie List

Web pages can store or retrieve info on your browser, including through cookies.  This info might be about you, your preferences, or your device, and it may contain identifiers that are unique to you or to your device. We and third parties collect that kind of info through cookies in each category below. You can turn most individual categories off by moving the toggle to the left and hitting “Save my choices” or turn them back on by moving it to the right and hitting that same button. You can revisit these choices later by clicking on “Cookie Preferences” in the footer of russellreynolds.com.  These choices apply only to russellreynolds.com.  These choices affect this browser only, and you will need to repeat this process if you use another browser, if you clear your cookies, or if you use a browser that automatically clears cookies.

More information:

Read Cookie Policy

Accept All
Reject Optional Cookies

Mandatory
Always Active

These cookies are required and cannot be turned off.

Cookie Details

Functional

These cookies mainly enable enhanced functionality and personalization. They let us provide a more personalized and convenient experience. Disabling or removing these cookies may make browsing pages less convenient or may prevent certain functionality from working correctly.

Cookie Details

Performance

Performance cookies mainly allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors use and interact with them. If you do not allow these cookies, we may have fewer ways to know when you have visited a page and may be less be able to monitor their performance.

Cookie Details

Targeting

These cookies may be used to target ads to you (such as by helping to build a profile of your interests to target ads).  If you do not allow these cookies, the advertising you experience may be more repetitive or less relevant to you.

Cookie Details

Unclassified

We recommend leaving Unclassified cookies off.  The Unclassified category could contain Functional, Performance, or Targeting cookies that we have not yet moved into the Functional, Performance, or Targeting categories above.  If you turn on the Unclassified category, all Unclassified cookies will be activated, even if you deactivate the specific Functional, Performance, or Targeting category.

Cookie Details

Save my choices