Does the Board-CEO Relationship Need a Reset?

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Does the Board-CEO Relationship Need a Reset?

An effective board-CEO relationship is at the heart of organizational success and requires ongoing collaboration and engagement from both sides.

A productive board-CEO relationship is crucial to strong company performance, especially amid rapid
change. Yet our latest Measure of Leadership survey of 2,400 CEOs and directors around the world
reveals a disconnect between CEOs’ expectations and board members’ perceptions. Our report explores this
confidence gap and shares advice on how to bridge it.

Read the report

The realities behind the board–CEO relationship

CEOs and board directors shared their candid thoughts with us on the kinds of knowledge, experience, support
and engagement that would enhance their partnership. Explore the areas where CEOs see room for improvement, where
boards see room for improvement and what an effective relationship looks like in practice.

See what they
said

Research at a glance

There’s a significant gap between how CEOs and directors perceive their current
relationship.

22%

22% of CEOs feel effectively supported by their boards

43%

43% of directors feel the board provides effective support to the CEO

While CEOs and directors agree on what is important in their relationship, they aren't aligned on how well that's being provided today.

Board directors see room for improvement in their relationship with CEOs.

67%

More than two-thirds (67%) of directors said the model of board-CEO engagement
should change somewhat or significantly as the business environment continues to
evolve.

Effective board support correlates to stronger outcomes.

Our survey found that CEOs who feel effectively supported by their boards also
report:

higher total shareholder returns

better achievement of growth goals

greater overall satisfaction with
their board’s contributions and engagement

68%

68% of CEOs who had an explicit conversation with their board about the
nature of support and input they can expect from board members said they got the
support they needed — indicating proactive expectation-setting is key to an
effective partnership.

Further reading to inspire action among CEOs and boards

How can boards and CEOs bridge the trust divide? Both sides must commit to ongoing collaboration, open dialogue and refinement of what a “good” relationship looks like, especially amid such turbulent times. At Spencer Stuart, we regularly publish insights and research that can help CEOs and their boards make progress toward accelerating performance, gaining alignment and building mutual trust.

How Board Chairs Can Build a Connection with the CEO Based on Trust

The five key areas that can make or break the CEO and board chair relationship.

Read more

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: Board Refreshment and Director Succession Planning

Our director pulse survey looks at the critical topic of board refreshment and succession planning.

Read more

Board composition: The road to strategic refreshment and succession

Approaches to board succession planning fall along a spectrum from highly reactive to strategic. How can boards move up the continuum to be more strategic?

Read more

Measure of Leadership: CEOs and Directors on Navigating Change

In our first Measure of Leadership report, more than 2,000 CEOs and board directors reveal their highest priorities and how they are navigating uncertainty.

Read more

Discovering the Life Cycle of a CEO

An excerpt from our groundbreaking new book examining the real drivers of performance and providing practical advice for CEOs navigating the ups and downs of their tenure.

Read more

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: Specialized Directors

This director pulse survey highlights the specialized skills boards are seeking to add, the skills they have added to their boards in recent years, and the impact those directors have had on the effectiveness of the board.

Read more