Tech Services: 3 Scenarios for Looking Outside the Sector for the Next Leaders

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Tech Services:

3 Scenarios for Looking Outside the Sector for the Next Leaders

By

Peter Cave-Gibbs,

Blair Martin and

Amitabh Sharma

July 2024

| 5 min read

Authors

Peter Cave-Gibbs

London

Blair Martin

Stamford

Amitabh Sharma

Dallas

SectionsIn this article

Sector lines are blurring when it comes to leadership talent in the technology and professional services industries. In our work with leading services businesses across the world, we are seeing more companies looking beyond their industry, into both adjacent industries and verticals, to find leaders with the functional and business capabilities they need to succeed. While every company’s particular service offering may vary — from consulting and advisory to custom application development to business process outsourcing —most companies in this world of “digital transformation” are bringing multiple service lines to market as companies (particularly the larger players) feel economic and competitive pressures to expand their business to new areas.

Additionally, in the world of both hardware and software products, more and more companies are investing in services, recognizing the value of high-quality, differentiated service delivery in ensuring customer loyalty and continuous revenue in the “as-a-service” business model. Increasingly, these services units are being redefined as standalone P&Ls, transitioning from mere operational cost centers to entities that function much like their “pure-play” services competitors.

Amid these trends, the services world needs a new leadership mindset. A leader’s success today is as much about “below the surface” attributes — an individual’s patterns of behavior, traits and style preferences — as it is about the traditional “above the surface” qualities you can easily find on a resume.

So, how do you find strong leaders from different sectors who can help shape the evolution of emerging tech services business? Below we explore three scenarios that offer examples of how to answer this question.

1.	 Taking a new approach to existing clients

Leaders with deep insights and experiences within a company’s existing markets can offer valuable insights on the specific challenges and opportunities within those customer bases, in particular through their broad industry networks and their unique insight on customer buying, behaviors and dynamics.

For instance, an executive well-versed in the complexities of the healthcare industry — its regulatory requirements, patient privacy concerns and IT systems, for example — could provide invaluable insights when transitioning into a role at a healthcare BPO company. Their expertise can inform strategies to enhance service offerings, tailor customer experiences and drive growth.

Sector-specific knowledge and connections enable these executives to effectively meet their clients’ unique needs, fostering stronger relationships and establishing a competitive advantage in the market.

2.	Expanding or reshaping the business model

Insights from different service sectors offer a powerful way to infuse new perspectives and innovative strategies into existing business models.

For example, executives with experience in strategy and management consulting are adept at addressing complex problems and developing customized solutions. The growing trend of these professional services experts assuming broader P&L responsibilities within services companies highlights how they are helping their new employers build higher-value, higher-profitability offerings.

The digitization of traditional white- and blue-collar business services firms has also led many companies to explore the tech services space for talent, particularly seeking executives with technical competence and an understanding of how to build, operate and commercialize tech platforms. Moreover, these companies value leaders with comprehensive commercial and go-to-market experience, especially as traditional consumption models evolve. All in all, this enables more customized and competitive propositions from their companies.

In one recent example, a CEO steeped in the world of tech services shifted to distribution services, where he has helped transform his company into a tech-enabled business service provider. His strategy has elevated the business’s competitive positioning and its value proposition.

3.	Targeting a new client base

Leaders with experience across different sectors can act as bridges between the services company and new target customers. Able to “speak the language” of the client, anticipate their needs and customize solutions that deliver value, they can offer an invaluable insider perspective for crafting a compelling value propositions for new customers. They can help design services that address unique industry pain points, and ultimately, win the trust and business of new clients.

An executive with a strong background in retail technology, for example, brings deep insights into consumer behavior, omnichannel strategies and the retail ecosystem. For a services company looking to incubate or expand its retail vertical, for example, that type of leader would prove strategically savvy in comparison to a tech services veteran who lacks familiarity with the retail sector. The retail expert could leverage their retail experience to develop targeted service offerings, build meaningful relationships with key retail clients, and navigate the competitive landscape more effectively.

• • •

Leaders with cross-sector experience can serve as vital connectors between a services company and its new or existing markets. Their ability to understand, anticipate or reimagine client needs enables them to address market strategies and often deliver unexpected value. And in particular, in situations where companies are looking for breakout business strategies, it may serve the company well to consider leaders who bring real diversity of experience and business models to the table.

Authors

Peter Cave-Gibbs

London

Blair Martin

Stamford

Amitabh Sharma

Dallas

Related Insights

First-Time CEOs in Tech Services: Six Themes for Success

6 min read

Tech services companies are increasingly looking to first-time CEOs to succeed their founders. We speak with five first-time CEOs to find out how they thrived in the position.

The Implication of Private Equity in the World of Tech Services

4 min read

As private equity investors expand into tech services and tech-enabled services, what are they seeking in leadership at these companies?

Leadership in Tech Services: Five Trends Companies Need to Plan For

5 min read

We look at five issues tech services companies need to address as they seek to navigate a changing environment.