Lead like … Ted Lasso? How media shapes today’s CEOs

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Lead like … Ted Lasso? How media shapes today’s CEOs

By

Global Board & CEO Advisory Practice

August 2024

| 4 min read

Author

Global Board & CEO Advisory Practice

Executives have long sought insights from the stories of history’s most famous leaders. Winston Churchill. George Washington. Ted Lasso. John Dutton.

Wait, what? Aren’t those fictional TV leaders?

As demands on leaders evolve — and time becomes ever more precious — chief executives and board directors are finding lessons (both good and bad) about leading from an increasingly wide variety of sources. As part of our Measure of Leadership program, we asked more than 2,000 CEOs and directors around the world to share a book, movie or TV show that taught them something about leadership. The responses were varied and fascinating.

We’re not sure how many leaders have “Believe!” signs above their desks, but dozens of CEOs cited television series Ted Lasso. Maybe it’s the way the American football coach turned Premier League manager embraces openness, vulnerability and the ability to prioritize what’s truly important? Similarly, we see authenticity, hard work and perseverance at the heart of another popular choice, television show Yellowstone and its complicated patriarch, John Dutton.

But what about Succession? Dozens referenced the series chronicling media baron Logan Roy and his dysfunctional, backstabbing family — we hope the CEO who said it was on point “given I work in a family business” wasn’t being literal. Succession offers a what-not-to-do list of toxic leadership traits, from using fear as a motivation tool to failing to have orderly succession plans to the perils of poor communication.

Of course, many leaders cited books, especially biographies and more traditional leadership texts. But the prominence of television shows and movies leads to two takeaways: that CEOs and board directors are finding lessons good and bad from popular culture, and leadership inspiration can come from unlikely as well as familiar sources.

Here’s more of a peek into where our global panel of CEOs and directors are finding lessons about leadership:

Biographies and autobiographies

Stories of iconic figures such as Winston Churchill, Indra Nooyi and Elon Musk show us how individuals’ strengths and flaws impact those around them and how they lead.

Business and leadership strategies

Titles like Leaders Eat Last by Simon Sinek and Extreme Ownership by Jocko Willink introduce us to new strategic frameworks and leadership principles.

Historical and political analyses

Works such as The Splendid and the Vile by Erik Larson and Team of Rivals by Doris Kearns Goodwin remind us we aren’t the first going through a challenge, and the past can teach us valuable lessons about the present.

Psychological and behavioral insights

Books like Thinking, Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman and Dare to Lead by Brené Brown urge us to better understand and leverage our humanity.

Philosophy, religion and ethics

Deeper thoughts and philosophical reflections like Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations, the Bible or The Meaning of Things help us put the day’s struggle into context and reaffirm fundamental principles.

Popular culture

We can’t forget to laugh, cry and witness the emotion of great characters in movies and shows ranging from Oppenheimer to Shogun and The Bear.

Innovation and disruption

Books like The Age of AI by Henry Kissinger, Eric Schmidt and Daniel Huttenlocher and Chip War by Chris Miller, as well as incisive commentary like the Pivot podcast, stimulate our thinking about rapid technological advances and global shifts.

Personal development and self-improvement

Every leader is trying to get better. From Atomic Habits to Can't Hurt Me, these inspire and inform our pursuit of excellence.

Any additions to the list? We’d love to hear what’s stretching your minds right now. Below are a few suggestions from leaders of our global Board and CEO Practice:

Alice Au

Hong Kong

Sir Alex Ferguson generously shares insight behind his most pivotal leadership decisions during his career at Manchester United and offers a rare window into who he is as a person.

Jason Baumgarten

Seattle

Each month I share a list of books I’m reading and learning from. First up is The Nordic Theory of Everything, which reminds us that our way of life in America is not necessarily the best or only way — there is much we can learn from other societies.

Rowen Bainbridge

London

Io Capitano, my best leadership movie this year.

Jim Citrin

Stamford

The spectacular Netflix historical fiction series, The Last Kingdom, brings to life the inspirational leadership of a 10th century English warrior whose courage, risk-taking, strategic cunning and caring for people help unite a disparate middle-ages England.

Julie Daum

New York/Miami

I enjoy anything by Arthur Brooks, who reminds us to continue to evolve and discover how our interests and talents can be applied in different arenas.

Bruce Williamson

Melbourne

James Kerr’s Legacy is a phenomenal look into what it takes to not only achieve success but sustain it over time —something leaders in every field should care about.

Author

Global Board & CEO Advisory Practice