Your board bio: Storytelling to connect the dots

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Your board bio:
Storytelling to connect
the dots

By

Rony Touma, Ph.D.

April 2025

| 3 min read

Author

Rony Touma, Ph.D.

Dubai

SectionsIn this article

A board bio is a one-page summary about you, written for a board secretary, CEO or chair to read, which outlines your potential fit for that specific board.

It is not the same as an executive CV or resumé.

It is not an interview on a page.

It is not the same as the board profiles you see on a company’s site.

You must think of a board bio as a highly flexible document that is adapted for each opportunity and is highly relevant to a specific company and board.

Be board-ready with your bio

Write a generic profile and keep that as your core document, but tailor your bio for each board position you apply for. Be board-ready with your bio. Do identify target people and companies you would like to represent, then look hard for opportunities as they arise. As few board seats are ever advertised, use your network — and also network with executive search firms. Identify yourself to the market.

The first board is the hardest

Do not under-estimate the importance of a non-profit organisation for your first board opportunity. It is a safe learning ground and a value-add for both sides. Think about university boards or sports clubs, too.

The same goes for subsidiary boards within your current company — this is low-risk for your company but highly beneficial to you. Challenge managers regularly to let you present to the board whenever possible. But expect lots of trial and error when you’re trying to get that first board seat: be patient and realistic. You must be engaged and current with your board bio and skills, and open-minded about the roles available.

A board bio is a story

While your board bio should only be one page, you are still telling a story, albeit succinctly. Use powerful action verbs (‘managed’, ‘led’, ‘motivated’, ‘initiated’ and, especially, ‘achieved’) to begin sentences. And avoid more passive verbs such as ‘helped’ and ‘contributed’ — and avoid ‘ loyal’, ‘passionate’, ‘hard-working’ and ‘team player’.

Related Insights:

Spencer Stuart in the Middle East and North Africa

Want to learn more about Spencer Stuart's services in the Middle East and North Africa? Find out how we can help grow your business, wherever you are in our region.

Stick to the facts and, if you struggle to write about yourself, it can be easier to do so in the third person. Remember you are connecting the dots for CEOs, board chairs and secretaries; this is not a time for buzzwords.

Suggested elements of a board bio

We do not provide a template for board bios. Instead we suggest you incorporate the following elements:

Photo — this is important. Use a professional headshot

Board value proposition/ candidate profile

Board experience (if applicable): This can include experience in front of your own company board, governance roles, interaction with external

Career history/ summary context: Give all titles, roles and (a plus) key dates. Metrics are very important to show impact — sizes and scope of responsibilities and value-add contributions. Do show any non-profit work

Education: Including degrees, certifications

Personal information and interests, as appropriate

Boards are also interested in:

Speaking engagements and other intellectual capital you can show

Interactions with external stakeholders, such as regulators, rating agencies, analysts or investors

Professional affiliations

Third-party recognition and awards

Metrics are very important to show impact

There is a skew to board-relevant topics such as governance, presenting to boards, challenging boards in discussions or dealing with external stakeholders.

As boards generally have three-year terms, job-hoppers who have repeatedly left a job after a couple of years will raise question marks. Short tenures do not need to be career-limiting but boards will prefer not to take the risk if it is a pattern.

Trends in appointments of non-executive directors (NEDs)

CEOs account for over half of new appointments to boards but executives from below board level are becoming more common. Equally, boards often ask for recently retired executives who have the recent experience but also the time to dedicate to their board role.

Today, it is increasingly common for younger directors to be appointed, often those with specific technology or geographic expertise; this can also help to correct diversity imbalance on boards. There is an increased focus on experience, both international and local.

Experience boards require from NEDs

Commercial/ operational (profit and loss (P&L), strategy restructuring, mergers and acquisitions (M&A), turnaround, innovation)

Functional expertise (finance, HR and remuneration, digital, supply chain, marketing)

Additional skills (environmental, social and governance (ESG), capital markets, financing and investor relations, regulation and compliance, geopolitical trends).

Transformation is a magic word for the Middle East region. These days I am doing multiple searches for NEDs where ESG is a key topic.

Characteristics of an ideal NED

Low in ego yet high in self-confidence: the capacity to be collaborative is the top strength boards look for, so do showcase this

Prepared both to challenge and support management yet still be a team player

Commercially aware, financially literate, a good appreciation of risk – boards are less interested in operations as such

Internationally minded

Fair-minded, with absolute integrity and wisdom and, above all, courage and common sense

A relationship-builder and an ambassador

Intellectually flexible, with a sharp mind, able to think laterally and beyond your area of expertise

Articulate and persuasive, whilst being a good listener and a good communicator

Ability to deal with complexity

Conversant with the prevailing governance practice and fiduciary duties

Learn more about our executive search and leadership consulting in the Middle East and North Africa.

This article first appeared on Aurora50.

Author

Rony Touma, Ph.D.

Dubai

Related Insights

Destination Gulf: Attracting the best and brightest global talent

3 min read

Rony Touma explores how the Gulf region’s state of permanent reinvention is helping attract the best talent to its borders.

Spencer Stuart in the Middle East and North Africa

For nearly 20 years, Spencer Stuart’s executive search and leadership consulting has helped build and enhance high-performing teams and supported strategic transformation across the Middle East and North Africa (MENA).

What Makes a Successful Leader in the Middle East?

1 min read

Three capabilities leaders need to succeed in the Middle East.