The Next HR

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The Next HR

Evolving the function in an era of unprecedented change and volatility

By

Tom Friedrich,

Susie Marlow and

Matthew Rose

September 2024

| 5 min read

Authors

Tom Friedrich

Chicago

Susie Marlow

Washington, D.C.

Matthew Rose

Atlanta

In today’s business environment, chief human resource officers (CHROs) must align their human capital strategy with the business strategy to accelerate growth while creating a culture that embraces diversity and inclusion. This requires HR leaders to understand the links and levers between business strategy and human capital strategy and ensure that their HR priorities directly support business goals and objectives while also creating an engaging employee experience.

Many CHROs and their HR function continue to make impressive strides, but our research suggests there is still vast opportunity to position HR as a strategic partner and value driver. While 70 percent of CHROs say that human capital and talent management are among their top-five business priorities, nearly 70 percent of HR’s time is still spent on administrative and operational activities, diminishing capacity for focus on strategic talent priorities. We see four imperatives for HR leaders.

The demand for strategic support from HR has never been greater. Building HR business partner (HRBP) capability focused on strategic business partnering, organizational effectiveness and developing talent strategies is critical.

The rapid shift to hybrid working accelerated by AI and digital transformation across the entire organization has become paramount. HR operations must evolve to deliver an employee experience that spans both the virtual and physical worlds.

Centers of excellence (CoEs) must continue to develop talent and HR solutions to support new ways of working and ensure they are delivered more quickly in an agile way.

HR teams of today require a fit-for-purpose structure and appropriate governance mechanisms to keep pace with today’s business needs. Now is the time to formally break down the silos created by traditional structures so that HR can improve organizational effectiveness by delivering end-to-end solutions for the business.

HR has clearly demonstrated business value, and HR leaders’ ability to serve as a true business partner has now become a common expectation from the C-suite. CHROs must now design an HR strategy and governance framework that aligns with the business, meets the needs of employees, and is agile and easy to integrate and deploy.

While a wholesale change may not be necessary, HR operating models must evolve to create both capability and capacity to improve employee engagement and deliver on the intended employee experience in a hybrid workforce environment. Additionally, HR must align with the business on the appropriate balance between driving business performance and a sharpened focus on the employee experience.

The evolution of HR

Traditional challenges:
Today’s solutions:

Inability to react quickly to a rapidly changing business environment
Deploy agile teams for critical initiatives, organization events, and as an ongoing community of expertise

Technology as the only enabler
Enable HR through leadership, governance, HR capability, technology and analytics

Fragmented and siloed HR programs, processes and teams
Integrate across HR to deliver end-to-end people solutions

HRBP role that has not delivered on its promise
Make the investments needed to enable HR business partners to become talent and organizational strategists

Programs and processes designed from the inside-out to deliver efficiencies for HR
Design from the outside-in to deliver a differentiated employee experience

Internally focused with emphasis on traditional HR needs and business expectations
Externally focused to understand and align with the business, market and customer needs

Download

Download

The next HR operating model

The design of the traditional three-pillar HR model — CoEs, HRBPs and HR operations — must be tailored to meet the specific goals and circumstances of each organization. Regardless of structure, an optimized HR operating model is focused on delivering four key outcomes:

Critical enablers

Successful implementation is dependent upon five critical enablers:

Taking action: What’s next?

Authors

Tom Friedrich

Chicago

Susie Marlow

Washington, D.C.

Matthew Rose

Atlanta