How CEOs Build Confidence in Their Leadership

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

How CEOs Build Confidence in Their Leadership

By

Jason Baumgarten,

Claudius A. Hildebrand and

Mahesh Madhavan

October 2024

| 1 min read

As featured in Harvard Business Review:

Download the full PDF >

Authors

Jason Baumgarten

Seattle

Claudius A. Hildebrand

New York

Mahesh Madhavan

Bermuda

New CEOs frequently face a conundrum. While the people around them publicly express high hopes for what they’ll be able to achieve, in private those same people are skeptical. Buoyed by outward expressions of support and eager to make their mark, CEOs steam ahead with bold new initiatives before they’ve won the full support and trust of all stakeholders, and this can get them into trouble.

The speed trap is seductive. After all, the conventional wisdom is that CEOs have roughly 90 days to prove themselves to their organizations. But our experience and research reveal that gaining the confidence of all stakeholders — something that’s crucial to their ability to effectively drive change — takes a full two years. And only by focusing strategically and purposefully on building trust during that period can CEOs genuinely create the conditions for long-term success.

Furthermore, when CEOs focus tactically on confidence building during their first two years, they set off a virtuous cycle that leads to a remarkable and consistent increase in the enterprise multiples of their companies in the years that follow, as shown in the chart below. We call this increase the confidence premium.

Top Performers Take Off in Year Three

The chart below shows value creation over the course of CEOs' tenure, as represented by the change in companies' enterprise multiples. For the first two years, as confidence is being built, there is little or no difference, but after that a "confidence premium" grows continuously.

So how can new CEOs start building confidence amid a blank slate? We’ve identified six key practices that top executives can apply systematically:

Set a deliberate pace

Pick your battles strategically

Align your team

Engage stakeholders at the right time

Communicate clearly and relentlessly

Better yourself

In this article, we explore what these practices entail and how CEOs can apply them, drawing on the personal experiences of our co-author Mahesh Madhavan and other CEOs.

Read the full article on hbr.org

Download

Download

Authors

Jason Baumgarten

Seattle

Claudius A. Hildebrand

New York

Mahesh Madhavan

Bermuda

Related Insights

Predicting CEO Success: When Potential Outperforms Experience

9 min read

New research sheds light on the benefits and limits of prior experience, and how boards can select the CEO who is most likely to succeed given the opportunities and challenges the company faces.

The Life Cycle of a CEO

In this groundbreaking new book, Claudius Hildebrand and Robert Stark combine unprecedented research—analyzing the individual performance of every twenty-first century CEO of the S&P 500 and accompanying macroeconomic and industry cycles—with 100 in-depth interviews to reveal the distinctive life cycle of a CEO.

Why Rookie CEOs Outperform

Experienced executives rely too much on old playbooks.