Accelerating women in leadership: How far can we go?

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Accelerating women in leadership: How far can we go?

The path forward for women is one of open-ended possibility when leaders and organizations take action.

Diverse perspectives in leadership drive innovation, growth and financial performance, yet women continue to be underrepresented in senior-level leadership roles. We surveyed over 2,300 women leaders globally about how far we have come and how we can continue to progress.

Read the report

Our research shows:

Women are split on the pace of progress in the workplace.

Nearly half (49%) of women leaders we surveyed see progress for women stalling or reversing.

49%

Organizations can do more to retain and develop women within their own walls.

87% of women leaders are confident they can achieve their career ambitions; 51% said they can at their current company.

51%

CEOs are more optimistic about the climate for women leaders in their own organizations versus other women leaders.

Three-quarters of women CEOs believe that the climate for women in their own organization is excellent/good.

75%

Yet only 56% of female C-suite leaders — and less than half of senior VPs and VPs — rate the climate in their organizations as highly.

.ring {
stroke: #999;
stroke-width: 6px;
}
.textstyle { font-family:FFScalaSansWebRegular, Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; font-size:250px; fill:var(--purple); text-anchor:middle; dominant-baseline:middle;}
.percentagesymbol { baseline-shift:35px; font-size:170px;}

56%

Women leaders identified the following organizational career drivers and derailers:

Drivers

Male sponsor

Supportive supervisor

External professional network

Rotational developmental assignments

Derailers

Promotions based on who you know vs. your performance

Unconscious bias

Women being held to higher standards than men

When they understand the drivers and derailers, leaders and companies can proactively find ways to accelerate progress for women in leadership.

Read the report

Advice from Today's Women Leaders: How Far Can We Go?

As part of our survey, we asked women leaders to share their advice for women starting their careers today. We received hundreds of responses, and three themes stood out: develop supportive networks, build skills and confidence, and win the inner game.

See what they said

Insights to help leaders and organizations take action

How far can we go? Real progress for women requires prolonged, active participation of both organizations and current leaders. What can leaders, teams and organizations do to dismantle barriers and elevate gender diversity in top positions?  Spencer Stuart has the experience and insights to help leaders bridge the gaps, accelerate action and drive breakthrough results at each level.

Unlocking China's Female Leadership Potential: An Actionable Path Forward

To further understand the status of women in the workplace, Spencer Stuart and Bain & Company conducted their third consecutive study on women leadership in China.

Read more

Balance sheets to boardrooms: Accelerating women leaders through P&L experience

Could pursuing P&L roles early unlock women's leadership potential? Learn why this critical experience can pave the way for future success.

Read more

Women in Finance: ‘Bold Steps’ to Leadership

Three panelists joined Spencer Stuart’s Women in Finance network to share insights on career paths, sponsorship, private equity experience and more.

Read more

Think You Know How to Lead Inclusively? Think Again.

To foster a true culture of inclusion, leaders must embrace the four attributes of an inclusive mindset.

Read more

Sharing Their Stories: The Factors Senior Women of Color Leaders Say Made the Difference in Their Careers

Often the “first and only” woman of color in senior roles and executive spaces, high-achieving women of color share advice and stories about their careers.

Read more

How CPG Companies Can Advance Gender Diversity in C-Suite P&L Leadership

Building a diverse GM talent pool is one of the most effective approaches companies can take to increase diversity in the CEO pipeline. What are companies with greater gender diversity at the top doing differently?

Read more