What We Heard at the 2024 CMO Summit

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

What We Heard at the 2024 CMO Summit

June 2024

| 4 min read

SectionsIn this article

Key findings

Hope and fear. Excitement and trepidation. Ever since ChatGPT burst into the public consciousness, generative AI has drawn particularly strong feelings in creative areas.

The goal is not to just have an AI solution just because you should, but rather to have one because it can offer a better way to market your products and services to target audiences.

It’s impossible to consider AI’s potential for value creation without taking a serious look at the legal and reputational perils of using the technology.

To maximize the potential of AI, you need talent that can think critically, ask good questions, and apply the lessons they’ve learned.

AI has been a buzzword for the past few years, and marketing leaders are still in the early stages of determining how the technology can enhance their work attracting and retaining customers. In particular, the dawn of generative AI offers marketing teams powerful new skills to boost their creative chops, but also a tight learning curve about how to use it at the right time and use it well.

AI’s impact on the marketing function was the theme of Spencer Stuart’s 22nd CMO Summit in New York, and the fascinating roundtable conversation with more than 20 top CMOs highlighted both the excitement about AI’s incredible promise — namely, its potential to reach and delight consumers more effectively than ever before — as well as the immense challenges that come from a powerful, evolving tool.

Below we look at some of the key themes from the conversation in New York, and what the issues raised mean for marketing leaders.

AI and change management

Hope and fear. Excitement and trepidation. Ever since ChatGPT burst into the public consciousness, generative AI has drawn particularly strong feelings in creative areas, where artificial intelligence offers opportunities to improve the way work is done while posing some genuine existential questions about computers taking over creative jobs that once seemed safe from incursion by technology.

One CMO shared how her team is split between what she called “early adopters and Luddites,” people eager to try out the new technology alongside those who are keen to protect their territory. She is trying to let these feelings play out naturally, institutionalizing curiosity, awareness and exposure to the technology to find out what’s now possible thanks to AI.

Quote

It’s one of those situations where you want to enable people with a lot of experience and the ability to judge. It’s the art of what’s now possible.”

CMO Summit Attendee

AI: From cost savings to value creation

AI’s sudden rise in the public eye has led to immense pressure to make an immediate impact with the technology, and to generate value as quickly as possible. While the temptation is to do everything you can with this new technology, our group of marketers agreed that the ability to capture AI’s full value will come from more robust, more organized, longer-term efforts.

The goal is not to just have an AI solution just because you should, but rather to have one because it can offer a better way to market your products and services to the target audience. As one CMO said during the discussion, “When you have these powerful technologies, you can quickly default to doing it because we can, as opposed to doing it because it’s the right thing.”

Quote

I don’t want to check the box, I want to build the capability to be more effective at delighting clients and prospects and have that feel personalized. It's all a conversation on change management.”

CMO Summit Attendee

Risk

The two topics above dovetail naturally to another topic for marketers and C-suites as they incorporate AI into operations: risk. It’s impossible to look at that journey from cost savings to value creation without taking a serious look at the legal and reputational perils of using AI.

Our attendees shared some interesting anecdotes about how their firms are monitoring AI-related risks. One CMO told us about a CEO who is reluctant to lean too hard or fast into using generative AI in creative, because of many still-murky legal and copyright issues to be worked out. Another CMO mentioned a fear of preexisting biases being perpetuated by AI. A few marketers from companies in highly regulated industries also spoke of how regulatory risks had limited their experimentation for the time being.

Quote

It reminds me of social media [more than 10 years ago], when you were trying to get permission to send a tweet out, and the ridiculous conversations we were having about that. There are learnings from that experience that we can bring to this particular opportunity.”

CMO Summit Attendee

Talent

An interesting portion of the discussion touched on how, perhaps paradoxically, liberal arts backgrounds have become valuable in the AI era. More than technologists, you need talent that can think critically, ask good questions, and apply the lessons they’ve learned.

There was also a lot of talk about how to share learnings and spread them throughout the organization. As with adopting any new technology, a lot of time can be wasted repeatedly having the same conversations when true success demands learning fast.

“We need self-starters who are able to become proficient fast,” one CMO said. “They need to be able to know how to use the model, quickly validate the findings, and then go back and improve upon that.”

Quote

AI is freeing up capacity, but getting the type of talent you need has become more challenging. You may need fewer people, but the caliber of those people is quite high.”

CMO Summit Attendee

Organization and structure

Access to generative AI has in many ways turned marketing processes on their head. Many participants talked about how more siloed setups are proving less effective than those inspired by scrum or agile. There was general agreement that everyone needs to be in the room, sharing ideas, testing them out and learning from the outcomes.

The implications go beyond marketing. A few of the bigger companies represented around the table are centralizing AI plans within strategy or transformation teams. Those companies are giving the teams the breathing room to develop longer-term solutions without undue pressure to pull it off too quickly.

Quote

I have realized the need for a marketing technologist who really understands how it is going to work, and can bring that vision to fruition. And as a company, our project technology team has a center of excellence that gets what you're trying to do, and embeds with you to develop the solutions.”

CMO Summit Attendee

AI: The leadership implications

Much has been written about how AI in general, and generative AI in particular, can offer assistance with more basic tasks like writing emails and finding themes in large blocks of text. But the true value for marketing will come when AI can help drive insights that deliver a positive impact for customers, and ultimately the company.

Through it all, the “human touch” remains critical. Several of our attendees spoke about AI’s potential to facilitate better connections with customers through better insights, driving more effective personalization and customer targeting efforts. As one CMO suggested, the next generation of AI is about better delivering on brand promises, as technology enables “personalization at scale.”

That said, the pace of change is incredibly fast — perhaps faster than any person or organization can incorporate them. The leading marketers will be those that build organizations that can innovate smartly, and convert AI-driven insights into happier customers.

Quote

The power of AI is at the top of the food chain, not the bottom.”

CMO Summit Attendee

Attendees

Jonathan Adashek, IBM

Rosi Ajjam, The Estée Lauder Companies

Benji Baer, CBRE

Jonnie Cahill, Heineken

Alex Craddock, Citigroup

Jill Cress, H&R Block

Ed Dandridge, AIG

Marc de Swaan Arons, Institute for Real Growth

Gail Glickman Horwood, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation

Melissa Grady, Cadillac

Arielle Gross Samuels, Blackstone

Soyoung Kang, EOS

Sharon Kenny-Peters, Charter Communications

Jay Livingston, Shake Shack

Greg Lyons, PepsiCo Beverages North America

Marcel Marcondes, AB InBev

Thomas Ranese, formerly Chobani

Lauren Sallata, Ricoh Digital Services, NA

Bindu Shah, Tory Burch

Stephen Tisdalle, FS Investments

Lauren Weinberg, Peloton

Sheryn Weiss, Dow Jones/WSJ