The Chief Commercial Officer: A Private Equity Value-Creation Powerhouse

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The Chief Commercial Officer: A Private Equity Value-Creation Powerhouse

By

Dave Vidor

May 2026

| 5 min read

Author

Dave Vidor

Los Angeles

SectionsIn this article

Key insights

Extended hold periods and slower exits are pushing private equity firms to rely less on M&A and more on organic growth to drive returns.

With revenue growth now accounting for approximately 54% of value creation in PE deals, the chief commercial officer has emerged as one of the most critical roles.

Today’s most effective CCOs exhibit a unique combination of capabilities, from using data to accelerate decision-making to establishing systems, processes and strategy to optimize the commercial engine.

The chief commercial officer (CCO) has become one of the most important post-acquisition hires for private equity (PE) sponsors. As extended hold periods and slow-to-materialize exits reduce the reliability of M&A-led growth, organic revenue growth has emerged as the core driver of value creation in PE deals, contributing an average of 54% of value creation.

In this environment, human capital decisions — particularly around who owns and orchestrates the growth agenda — are increasingly central to success in a private equity deal. As LRS CEO Matt Spencer told us, “The value creation that comes from somebody that's classically trained in revenue growth sales who can also influence organic growth and value proposition is critical to getting a return on their investment.”

As a result, the CCO role is evolving from a relationship-driven sales operator to a transformation-oriented leader who owns the full revenue engine from pricing to data, systems and execution discipline.

So what does it take to succeed as a CCO in today’s PE-backed environment? And how can PE sponsors increase the likelihood that their commercial leader will quickly deliver on value-creation goals and milestones?

The evolution of the chief commercial officer in private equity

Companies typically need a CCO once operations begin to professionalize and growth ambitions exceed the limits of legacy leadership models. What follows is not just an expansion of responsibilities for commercial leadership, but a fundamental shift in how growth is led.

In this environment, the CCO operates as an enterprise integrator, aligning sales, marketing, operations and finance around a strategic growth agenda that includes pricing, go-to-market strategies and customer experience. They bring structure, rigor and commercial leadership to previously siloed functions. As part of this new mandate, the CCO becomes a strategic partner to the CEO, chief operating officer and CFO, helping them consider where to invest for growth and where to make calculated trade-offs.

External scrutiny is also reshaping the CCO’s role. Investors and sponsors know that a strong CCO can positively impact company valuation and buyer interest. As such, sponsors are pressing commercial leaders for a compelling and credible growth story. HP Nanda, CEO of Arcwood Environmental, notes: “Buyers want to hear directly from the commercial leader. They want to understand the customers — why they stay, what makes revenue sticky and how growth will continue.”

To meet the heightened requirements and expectations of this role, PE sponsors will need a new kind of commercial leader.

Five capabilities of an effective chief commercial leader

Today, the best CCOs demonstrate a distinct set of interconnected commercial capabilities, enabling them to translate aggressive growth plans into sustained value creation. Here’s what they must do.

Translate growth strategy into action

It’s easy to identify value-creation ideas, but much harder to put them into action, which is why effective CCOs combine strategic vision with hands-on execution. They are not afraid to get into the weeds. “We want ‘best-athlete’ leaders who are in the top 1% in execution. They must be a creative problem solver, disciplined and able to take ideas and make value-creation opportunities,” says Jim Gregory, CEO of Norfolk Street Group. Hands-on CCOs can put structure and process around sales, transforming the function from relationship-driven to a scalable growth engine.

Lead effectively amid ambiguity

The best CCOs operate effectively and decisively amid ambiguity. They think on their feet, take ownership of problems and make tough trade-offs to capture growth opportunities. This capability is critical in pressure-cooker PE environments that may lack established infrastructure, processes and systems. CCOs with this skill adapt and respond quickly to a variety of challenging situations.

Establish authority through expectation setting and accountability

Strong CCOs quickly establish credibility and authority that earns followership from their team and confidence from the sponsor and the board. They do this by establishing agreed-upon metrics, setting clear goals and expectations and holding people accountable for outcomes. As a result, alignment forms more quickly and initiatives move faster from plan to execution, helping the organization achieve growth goals.

A strong reporting discipline and clear process for gathering metrics, evaluating progress and continuously refining workflows also keeps commercial leaders on the path to meeting milestones.

Demonstrate financial acumen and data-driven decision-making

CCOs see technology and AI-driven tools as enablers, increasing the velocity and quality of commercial decision-making. They analyze complex financial information, leveraging often-incomplete data to make critical decisions in areas such as pipeline health, call plans, territory strategy, incentives and sales forecasts.

Critical to this capability is judgment. The best CCOs know what makes a difference on value creation — and what doesn’t — enabling them to tune out noise and act decisively, even with incomplete information.

At one PE-backed portfolio company, the CCO inherited what they thought was a $600 million sales pipeline when in reality, the pipeline was significantly less. After analyzing the data and assessing pipeline quality, the CCO reduced it to $200 million of actual business.

Leverage customer experience as a growth lever

Strong commercial leaders treat customer service as a core commercial lever rather than an “add-on” skill. They make strategic decisions about service models, account coverage, call center design and digital engagement that directly shape revenue, retention and expansion opportunities. While historically atypical for mid-market businesses, we’re seeing some companies begin to measure net promoter scores to inform customer service and investment decisions.

The impact of this capability is most visible at exit when leaders can clearly link customer experience to retention, pricing integrity and long-term growth, building buyer confidence that revenue is durable rather than episodic.

A playbook for value creation: The first 100 days of a CCO

Sponsors should assess the capabilities of their current commercial leader and, if necessary, hire a new CCO as soon as possible post-acquisition, rather than wait until growth stalls or revenue issues surface, a common and costly misstep. Delays in hiring could also impede centralizing and professionalizing the growth agenda across functions in a timely manner.

While every company context is different, our experience and conversations with PE sponsors point to several best practices that can help CCOs unlock value in the critical first months in their role.

Get early alignment between the C-suite and sales: Ensure the CCO, CEO and board are aligned on why the CCO was hired and what their priorities, milestones and measurement will be and how they will meet them. Early alignment helps avoid clouding the path to value creation.

Put the CCO in front of customers during onboarding: Get the CCO to engage with customers early on to uncover any unmet needs or points of friction and ensure the business presents a unified front. “Our onboarding approach includes field visits, direct engagement with staff and customers and setting clear goals and objectives that align with investor expectations,” says Nicholas Cockett, CEO of Full Circle Fiber Partners.

See what’s underneath the executive polish: While charismatic candidates with executive presence present well in the boardroom and to customers, those traits can mask gaps in problem-solving, judgment or analytical capabilities. PE sponsors must assess whether a charismatic CCO has the skills to understand complicated systems and processes and deliver results quickly, especially in mid-market buy-builds. As an example, sponsors should interview and reference against concrete examples of how executives have personally transformed sales organizations through strategies they developed.

Preserve institutional knowledge in the top team: Companies hiring a CCO from outside the industry — which is common — should ensure continuity in the top team of the commercial function to avoid losing deep industry and customer knowledge. When leadership turnover is high, customer relationships can suffer as new leaders are brought up to date on their needs, expectations and pain points, slowing momentum toward value creation.

Quickly course-correct if value creation stalls: If the CCO cannot meet value creation expectations in the first 45 to 60 days, make changes quickly, whether that is finding a new commercial leader or working with a committed adviser to ensure issues are caught early and addressed.

When these best practices are in place, there is a better chance value creation becomes visible quickly.

Questions for PE sponsors and PE-backed company CEOs to consider

Are the management team, board and operating partner aligned on the commercial talent strategy and profile?

How can we assess our CCO against capability needs versus, for example, an ability to execute relentlessly?

Do we have clarity on what success looks like in the first 100 days in the role, including specific commercial milestones tied to value creation? How will we hold the CCO accountable?

Do we have the systems in place to provide the CCO with the reporting necessary to drive performance?

Do we have enough institutional knowledge in our top team to fill in the gaps if we hire an external commercial leader?

• • •

Firms that elevate, equip and engage the right CCO early are positioning themselves for stronger organic growth and greater confidence and conviction at exit.

Author

Dave Vidor

Los Angeles

Related Insights

Partners in Value Creation: The Vital Bond Between Investors and CEOs

11 min read

A strategic blueprint for cultivating a trust-based partnership and achieving the value creation plan.

Five Talent Trends in Private Equity

5 min read

We looked at more than two dozen private equity firms to learn more about what talent strategies they are adopting and where they can invest more.

The 5 Stages of the PE Investment Cycle: The Human Capital Decisions That Matter Most

A guide to the human capital decisions that drive value creation throughout the entire PE investment life cycle.