The General Counsel’s Role in Supporting Board Excellence

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The General Counsel’s Role in Supporting Board Excellence

By

George Anderson and

Jennifer L. Herrmann

January 2023

| 3 min read

Authors

George Anderson

Boston

Jennifer L. Herrmann

Philadelphia

SectionsIn this article

In an environment of increasing expectations for board performance, general counsel have an important role to play. A recent study by Gartner showed that when general counsel self-assess, they acknowledge there is room to improve in several critical areas when it comes to their board; these include onboarding new directors, supporting the board evaluation, and sourcing and recruiting new directors.

Download

Download

We see an opportunity for the board and the legal function to work together more effectively to enhance board performance and value. General counsel who elevate their advisory role in the boardroom deepen relationships with directors and enhance their impact, influence and credibility with the board and CEO.

Figure 1: General Counsel Effectiveness at Conducting or Facilitating Board Management

percentage of general counsel who said they were effective or very effective

Source: Gartner Says General Counsel Are Not Delivering on Director Management Activities, Gartner, September 2022.

1. Board annual self-assessments

Nearly all S&P 500 boards conduct an annual self-assessment as required by stock exchange listing standards. A growing number of boards are also conducting individual director assessments. According to our 2022 U.S. Spencer Stuart Board Index, 47 percent of S&P 500 boards disclose that they have some form of individual director evaluation, up from 31 percent a decade ago.

General counsel can support the board in strengthening and enhancing results from their assessment approach. This involves redefining the process as one that goes beyond a check-the-box activity and provides real value and substantive improvement. General counsel can guide the board by asking several key questions.

Critical questions for every general counsel to consider

How can we get more meaningful results from our process?

How can we address board performance at all three levels: full board, committee and individual?

Who from the board will lead the process and ensure meaningful outcomes from our assessments?

Would the board benefit from working with an external partner to ensure a more transparent, anonymous and effective process?

If the board would benefit from external support, general counsel can play a vital role in identifying, vetting and recommending a partner. Boards that engage outside support frequently report that working with an external partner can encourage directors to share more freely resulting in critical issues being surfaced and addressed.

Annual board, committee and director evaluations

2022
2021
2017
2012

Full board and committees
47%
47%
54%
51%

Full board, committees and directors
47%
45%
33%
31%

Full board only
5%
6%
9%
13%

Full board and director
1%
2%
4%
5%

Source: 2022 U.S. Spencer Stuart Board Index.

2. Board recruitment

Recruiting new directors and evaluating candidates for open positions is a key responsibility of the board, often led by the nominating and governance committee. While general counsel often have a limited role in candidate identification and selection, they can help improve the recruiting process.

Recruiting new independent directors can be time-consuming. Before commencing any search, general counsel can help directors define and align on the search process, including the sequencing of events; the responsible parties for each stage; the board’s approach to candidate meetings and interviews; and the strategy for keeping the full board informed of the search. They can also help identify and vet search firms with which the board may work.

Having the right group of directors on the board is a critically important factor in board performance. Boards should continually consider whether they have the optimum composition and the right mix of skills, experiences and backgrounds for the company’s strategic direction. They can also regularly evaluate the contributions of individual directors as part of the board effectiveness assessment. The general counsel can help ensure that the annual assessment process serves as a mechanism for surfacing and addressing gaps, and as a catalyst for refreshing the board as new needs arise.

72%

of new directors are from historically underrepresented groups*

34%

of new directors are serving on their first public company board

98%

of boards conducted annual performance evaluations

50%

of new directors have experience working internationally

Source: 2022 U.S. Spencer Stuart Board Index.

* Defined as individuals who self-identify in one or more of the following categories: women, underrepresented racial/ethnic group or the LGBTQ+ community.

Critical questions for every general counsel to consider

How can I better work with the chair and nominating/governance chair on the board’s recruitment priorities and processes?

How can I help improve our communication to shareholders regarding the composition of our board?

How would we benefit from an outside partner to support our director recruitment and help us expand reach?

Has the board developed a forward-looking board succession plan and what steps is it taking to identify and engage candidates that might satisfy that plan?

3. Director onboarding

Director recruitment does not end with a candidate’s appointment to the board. A thorough, tailored, post-appointment onboarding program is essential for preparing new directors to quickly add value. The general counsel frequently plays a key role in onboarding efforts, with the support and guidance of the board. The onboarding leader is responsible for helping new directors understand their role and responsibilities; ensuring meetings are scheduled and materials are available; and ensuring the onboarding process is customized for the needs of each individual director. This leader will give a newly appointed director a sense of what it’s like to be on the board, help them build relationships with other members of the board and the management team, and bring them up to speed with the major issues and challenges that the board will be discussing in upcoming meetings.

Board Director Knowledge Center

Resources for corporate directors, aspiring directors and corporate secretaries, including onboarding timelines and checklists. Visit here.

Critical questions for every general counsel to consider

When was the last time we reviewed and updated our new director onboarding program?

What standard resources and information do we make available for all new directors and what supplemental information will be available as an option for those directors who may want it?

How have we incorporated feedback on the onboarding program from the directors who recently joined our board?

How can I help set up a formal or informal mentorship program for experienced board members to coach and support new or first-time directors?

• • •

General counsel can elevate their credibility and influence in the boardroom by helping boards enhance board effectiveness assessments, director recruiting and onboarding. Amid so much change and unpredictability, having robust processes in these critical areas of board performance will position boards to better adapt to a highly dynamic business environment, and will help individual directors succeed. By taking a more visible, proactive role in guiding the board, general counsel will enhance their own visibility and effectiveness, as an even more impactful, strategic member of the senior leadership team.

Authors

George Anderson

Boston

Jennifer L. Herrmann

Philadelphia

We use analytics cookies that help us enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Please click on the "Accept all cookies" button to help us improve your user experience.

If you would like to know more about our use of cookies, click here.

Accept all cookies Allow only essential cookies
Manage preferences

Privacy Preference Center

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information
Allow All Manage Consent Preferences

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Performance Cookies

Performance Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by such partners to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store personal information directly but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back ButtonPerformance Cookies

Search Icon
Filter Icon

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Consent Leg.Interest
Switch Label label
Switch Label label
Switch Label label

Reject All Save My Preferences