“Your Network Is Your Net Worth”: Women Finance Leaders Share Their Leadership Journeys

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

“Your Network Is Your Net Worth”: Women Finance Leaders Share Their Leadership Journeys

By

Courtney Fletcher,

Jennifer Hirshfeld and

Lindsey Land

November 2023

| 5 min read

Authors

Courtney Fletcher

Washington, D.C.

Jennifer Hirshfeld

Toronto

Lindsey Land

Houston

SectionsIn this article

In Spencer Stuart’s work helping organizations develop and find great leaders, we’ve seen the impact the right leaders can have on their organizations — and the immense value that more diverse teams bring. In the finance function in particular, while women still make up only 15 percent of Fortune 500 CFOs, we continue to see more gender diversity in the CFO role and across the C-suite, in the boardroom and in operating roles.

With this in mind, Spencer Stuart’s Financial Officer Practice recently convened our Women in Finance network for our ongoing series of women in leadership events, bringing together an accomplished group of women finance leaders to discuss successful strategies for increasing female representation, success and experiences in C-suites and boardrooms.

We were honored to host three extraordinary women leaders as our panelists at this latest meeting, all three first-time public company CFOs: Pam Bentley, CFO of GCM Grosvenor (formerly with The Carlyle Group and Arthur Andersen); Mary Ann Betsch, CFO of Lazard (formerly of Citadel and PWC); and Ana Chadwick, EVP & CFO at Pitney Bowes (formerly of GE, and currently a member of the board of Dollar General).

Below we look at some of the main takeaways from our conversation.

The path to CFO

All three panelists spoke of the varied assignments, roles and experiences in their career that enabled them to ascend into the CFO role for a public company. Betsch joined Lazard in 2022 from Citadel, the investment management firm. She spent 17 years prior to that at PwC, where her work allowed her to build on her foundational accounting education and background.

Quote

As CFO, it’s less about your own finance skills, and more about putting people around you that understand their technical trade and can do what you need them to do.”

Pam Bentley

CFO,
GCM Grosvenor

“The common thread was putting myself in situations that were uncomfortable, where there was a very clear opportunity to learn something and do something I hadn't done before,” Betsch said. “I gained a lot from opportunities where maybe I didn’t have the exact right background, but I had a great opportunity to work with people I could learn from.”

Bentley’s road to finance function leadership started quite literally in her teen years, when she began taking accounting jobs to help her family. As she amassed experience over the next many years, it was the challenges, she said, that made her a better leader.

“I've always approached my career similar to how you teach kids: You learn more from failures than your successes,” Bentley said. “You learn over time to be more flexible, to listen, to ask questions, and to always treat everything like you’re a student.”

The team around you

Indeed, while amassing those skills over your career is certainly important to reaching the CFO level, once you reach the coveted C-Suite position it’s important to know your strengths and know what skills you need on your team.

Quote

The relationship really culminates when someone is willing to stick their neck out for you…. And then remember when you’re doing your current role, you're a role model, other people look up to you. And then you pay it forward.”

Ana Chadwick

EVP & CFO,
Pitney Bowes

“When it comes to the CFO role, you have your strengths, and you have to complement those teams with their strengths,” Chadwick said. “So you need to do a self-assessment, know where your gaps are, but don't use that as a reason not to take action. Use it to as a way to built the strongest team possible.”

Bentley, who previously was chief accounting officer at The Carlyle Group, the private equity firm, noted that while the finance skills she had amassed in her career are the foundation of being CFO, success in the position requires a lot more about understanding how the business works and communicating effectively with clients, shareholders and Wall Street analysts.

“Your network is your net worth,” Bentley said. “Through your career, and when finding the right people for your company, it's who you know and how fast you get the right people in the right place…. As CFO, it’s less about your own finance skills, and more about putting people around you that understand their technical trade and can do what you need them to do. That frees you up to think strategically and be an effective business partner.”

Embracing “your normal”

Much of the panel discussion centered on navigating a world of C-suites and finance leadership that is typically male. Chadwick noted that because so many more leaders are men, many of her most important mentors were also men, although she said never thought of the gender element as she sought their counsel.

“The relationship really culminates when someone is willing to stick their neck out for you,” Chadwick said. “When you find that, treasure it, whether it’s a man or a woman…. And then remember when you’re doing your current role, you're a role model, other people look up to you. And then you pay it forward.”

Quote

I gained a lot from opportunities where maybe I didn’t have the exact right background, but I had a great opportunity to work with people I could learn from.”

Mary Ann Betsch

CFO,
Lazard

Betsch noted that when it comes to issues like parenthood, her career experience had shown that traditional gender stereotypes about the man devoting everything to work and being okay with missing family life haven’t held up. As a leader, she said, she aims to make everyone feel comfortable with embracing their life outside work.

“I think you can de-emphasize that it's a woman's issue, and actually just treat everybody as having things that are important to them, whether they have kids or not,” Betsch said. “You lead by example. You say that you’re leaving early today for a school concert, so that the team sees it as normal and acceptable for them as well.”

Bentley shared a story about her youngest daughter, around 5 years old, asking her what men, like her dad, do during the day. She responded that her dad works during the day, and her daughter said. “Why? That’s a lady’s job.”

“I tell that story to everyone, especially new moms coming back, because all that guilt is not necessary,” Bentley said. “You do it to yourself. Your normal is your kids’ normal. They don’t hold it against you that you want to have a career. They are actually proud of you. So be proud of yourself and embrace that in your teams.”

Authors

Courtney Fletcher

Washington, D.C.

Jennifer Hirshfeld

Toronto

Lindsey Land

Houston