Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: Activism Preparedness

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: Activism Preparedness

March 2023

| 2 min read

With proxy season looming, we surveyed directors for their insights on their board’s activism preparedness. Directors of nearly 360 public companies responded, and nearly all reported having some sort of activism action plan. More than half gave their board’s preparedness plan high marks.

According to the surveyed directors, the five most common “activism preparedness” action steps are:

Only 30% reported conducting a “tabletop” exercise to identify vulnerabilities and possible responses.

When it comes to external support, three-quarters of respondents said their board has identified outside legal counsel, while two-thirds have identified an investment bank or financial adviser. Fewer than half said the board has identified a communications firm for assistance.

Most of the surveyed public directors have taken action in response to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s new rule mandating a universal proxy ballot in contested elections. Nearly 40% reviewed the corporate bylaws, and another 23% amended the bylaws.

Directors monitor investor sentiment by listening to quarterly analyst calls (82%) and receiving regular updates on management meetings with shareholders (78%) and the shareholder base (76%).

1. On a scale of 1-5, how would you rate your board’s action plan to respond to an activist seeking changes to the board? (1 being no plan, 5 being a well-defined action plan)

How are boards preparing for an activist situation? Most have identified outside advisers and enhanced shareholder engagement.

2. What actions has the board taken to prepare for an activist situation? (Select all that apply)

Identified advisers
66%

Enhanced shareholder engagement practices
63%

Enhanced proxy disclosures
55%

Changed board composition
47%

Upgraded board assessments
46%

Conducted tabletop exercise (e.g., analyze business and governance vulnerabilities as an activist might)
30%

None
8%

Other
4%

Boards are more likely to have identified outside law firms/counsel for activist situations.

3. Please select the advisers you have identified to work with in an activist situation. (Select all that apply)

Outside law firm/counsel
75%

Investment bank/outside financial adviser
64%

Communications firm
41%

Proxy solicitor
24%

None
12%

Search firm
5%

Other
1%

Directors report taking a variety of approaches to familiarizing themselves with shareholders and their views on company performance.

Regular updates from management on the shareholder base, management meetings and joining quarterly earnings calls are all common approaches.

4. In the last 12 months, what has the board done to familiarize itself with its shareholders and their view on company performance? (Select all that apply)

Listened to quarterly earnings calls
82%

Received regular updates on any management meetings with shareholders
78%

Received regular updates on the shareholder base
76%

Participated in shareholder engagement
40%

Participated in/attended investor day
30%

Invited shareholder(s) to speak at a board meeting
9%

None
1%

Other
<1%

The majority of public companies in our survey took some action in response to the UPC by reviewing or amending bylaws.

5. What actions to your bylaws has the board taken in response to the universal proxy card rule? (Select one)

* Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

Related Insights

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: Individual Director Assessments

February 2024

2 min read

Spencer Stuart's pulse survey of directors on public company boards found that a growing number of boards are using individual assessments to improve their effectiveness.

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: CEO Succession 2023

June 2023

3 min read

Our pulse survey of 625 directors on U.S. public and private company boards found a wide range of responses about how they are approaching CEO succession.

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey Series

Spencer Stuart’s pulse surveys of directors on public and private company boards gather timely insights on current issues shaping the boardroom agenda.