The Path to General Counsel

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The Path to General Counsel

Career Advice and Lessons Learned from Lincoln Financial Group Executive Vice President and General Counsel Craig Beazer

By

Jennifer L. Herrmann and

Jill W. Kernan

January 2023

| 4 min read

Authors

Jennifer L. Herrmann

Philadelphia

Jill W. Kernan

Philadelphia

SectionsIn this article

Spencer Stuart recently hosted an event as part of our ongoing “Path to General Counsel” series, inviting a select group of high-potential, senior in-house lawyers for an intimate, roundtable discussion on navigating the path to general counsel. We were honored to have Craig Beazer, executive vice president and general counsel of Lincoln Financial Group, as our guest speaker. Prior to joining Lincoln, Craig served as executive vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary at KeyBank and, earlier in his career, held leadership roles with significant financial services companies, including The Bank of New York Mellon, Bank of America Corp., and General Electric Capital Corporation. Craig is known for his commercial acumen and his ability to act as a strategic thought partner to executive teams and boards.

During the discussion, Craig shared his background and career history with the group, highlighting critical decisions he made, lessons learned, and broader advice around career management and leadership development. Below are some of the key takeaways for both aspiring and current general counsel.

Lesson 1:  Always respond

Craig learned this important lesson early on in his legal career: no matter the time of day or day of the week, being responsive to clients is your number-one priority; that does not mean you have to know the answer to
everything at all times. In fact, he noted that it is better to say, “I’ll have to get back to you,” than to offer unsound advice. Inaccurate or incomplete
answers, Craig said, can hurt your credibility but it is always important that your key stakeholders know they can rely on you to be available.

Download

Download

Lesson 2:  Be succinct and hit the high notes

At GE Capital, Craig handled corporate governance and securities work, giving him many opportunities to present to executive stakeholders. Craig
advises to be succinct and to “hit the high notes.” When he gives a presentation, he assumes that his audience has read the preparation materials
and focuses his content on the most important points and any additional
aspects that were not included in the materials. Craig also suggests leaving
plenty of time for questions and advised that you should be prepared to be
inundated with them.

Lesson 3: Run toward challenges, not away from them, and keep your cool

During Craig’s time as deputy general counsel and corporate secretary earlier in his career, activist investors presented a challenge, and suddenly he found himself
having to seek approval from the Federal Reserve on just about every decision. “I ran toward that issue,” he
said, “because I had a stake in resolving those issues and, through that work, I was able to get involved in
important conversations with the most senior leaders of the organization.”

Along the same lines, Craig noted that it is natural
— even unavoidable — to feel stressed at times. He
advised to keep a cool demeanor in front of your stakeholders. “I get stressed when I’m alone in my office,
but I will never let anyone see me stressed or angry. It
is important to be steady and calm.”

Lesson 4: Find the environment in which you thrive

When Craig was invited to interview for the role of general counsel at Lincoln Financial, the pandemic was in
full swing, and the entire hiring process took place in a remote environment. “I did not get to break bread with
anyone on the team,” he recalled. Once people began to return to the office, he was eager to get back in the
door. “For me, being in the office and around people is the thing I enjoy most. I like the informal aspect — the
things you cannot put a price on: water cooler chat, grabbing lunch, informal things that build relationships.”

Of his career path, Craig noted there was only one role
that was not a strong fit for his personality, but even that
was a good learning experience. It taught taught him
that he thrives best in an in-person workplace, where he
can interface with team members on a daily basis.

Lesson 5: Value culture

Craig noted that culture is immensely important in finding
the right career fit. When it comes to creating a positive
culture within his own team, he encourages a transparent,
communicative atmosphere and keeps his door open all
the time, encouraging people to come in and chat. He
believes it is “so important that people are what they say
they are. There are some things I obviously cannot share
with my team, but I go right up to that edge.”

Lesson 6: Build relationships and seek feedback

Regardless of whether you work onsite, remotely or in a
hybrid structure, building relationships is perhaps the most
important part of your job. “You want honest people in your
corner, to create a sounding board for making decisions.
Better to have someone in your corner, than fighting them
up the hill.”

Building your brand outside of your current company and
role is equally important. This means taking speaking
opportunities, attending industry events and, sometimes,
answering recruiter calls even when you are not actively
pursuing a new role. It is important to have a balance
between internal and external efforts: “You never know what
will happen, but life is too short not to try.”

One valuable aspect of relationship building is the development of a mentor-mentee relationship. He advised that
if you are communicative and open to giving and receiving
feedback in positive ways, mentorships often come along
naturally. “It takes two people,” Craig said, “but it starts
with the mentee. If you are not getting good mentorship, it
is time to seek out other opportunities.”

Lesson 7: You still have to build your resume

Softer skills aside, “good old-fashioned resume-building experience” is still highly valuable to any career path — particularly because the days of staying in a company or role
for decades are over. Normalcy now means taking advantage of new opportunities when
the time is right.

Craig was able to avail himself of opportunities to gain experience with M&A, IPOs, governance, employment law and litigation. He did this partly by seeking out opportunities
that would require him to learn new things. His advice to those climbing the legal ladder is to recognize when it is time to look elsewhere and pay attention to opportunities as
they come along.

Lesson 8:  Find what makes you distinctive

Above all, Craig gets things done, and it is this quality that has best served him throughout
his career. “When I first got to GE,” he said, “if you did not get things done, you would not
be successful. But I figured out this was my calling. I do not need to be the world’s brightest
legal mind. I just need to get stuff done, and done well.” Craig encourages aspiring general
counsel to work out what makes them distinctive and market themselves accordingly.

Authors

Jennifer L. Herrmann

Philadelphia

Jill W. Kernan

Philadelphia

Related Insights

The Path to GC: Career Advice from Longtime Tyco General Counsel, Judy Reinsdorf

3 min read

Judy Reinsdorf, who served as GC of Tyco and several other public companies, shares valuable tips for both aspiring and current general counsels.

The General Counsel Playbook

13 min read

Onboarding advice for newly appointed general counsel to accelerate their impact.

The Next Generation of Law Firm Leadership

4 min read

For top law firms today, strategic operational leadership has become a top priority. We spoke with key leaders from top firms about how they are shaping their leadership strategies for the years ahead.