World Retail Congress confirms 2026 Advisory Board

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

World Retail Congress confirms 2026 Advisory Board

March 2026

| 6 min read

The World Retail Congress confirms 20 CEOs and senior global retail experts as members of its Advisory Board for 2026, helping to deliver an unrivalled high-level forum for the retail sector.

The Advisory Board members bring extensive leadership experience from retail businesses that collectively generate almost $250 billion in annual revenues and employ around 1.3 million people worldwide, operating in 103 countries.

Representing companies headquartered in 13 countries, the Advisory Board members include 16 different nationalities, providing diverse perspectives from various segments of the retail industry and across the globe.

The World Retail Congress today announces its 2026 Advisory Board members, who have shaped this year’s conference agenda and will continue to advise to deliver an unrivalled high-level forum for senior retailers and industry followers.

Ian McGarrigle, Chair of the World Retail Congress said:

“The formation of the 2026 Advisory Board is pivotal for the World Retail Congress.  The insights brought by CEOs of leading global retailers will be instrumental in shaping our programme.  Their expertise will help us to create a compelling agenda that addresses the evolving needs of the retail industry.”

Sally Elliott, Chair of the Advisory Board said:

“We are delighted to welcome our new members and greatly value the insights provided by this outstanding group of global leaders. Their guidance will play a vital role in informing the World Retail Congress on behalf of the sector.”

The full list of Advisory Board members includes:

Juliet Anammah, former CEO, Jumia Nigeria

Roy Bagattini, Group CEO, Woolworths Holdings

Gaston Bottazzini, former CEO, El Corte Inglés

Sergio Bucher, Supervisory Board Member, Otto Group

Agustin Coppel, Chair, Coppel Group

Nobuo Domae, former Chair, Ryohin Keikaku (Muji)

Sally Elliott, Global Retail & UK Consumer Practice leader, Spencer Stuart

Jennifer Foyle, President and Executive Creative Director, American Eagle Outfitters

Fahed Ghanim, CEO, Majid Al Futtaim Lifestyle

William Kim, Chief Lifestyle Officer, Project B

Ian McGarrigle, Chair, World Retail Congress

Judith McKenna, former President & CEO, Walmart International

Jaume Miquel Naudi, Chair & CEO, Tendam

Scott Price, Group CEO, DFI Retail

Régis Schultz, CEO, JD Group

Frederico Trajano, President, Magalu

Libby Wadle, CEO, J.Crew Group

Hani Weiss, CEO Max Fashion, Landmark Group

Jennifer Woo, Chair & CEO, Lane Crawford Joyce Group

Ying Xu, former President, Wumart

About World Retail Congress

Founded in 2007, the World Retail Congress is the leading annual event for the global retail sector, bringing together industry leaders, stakeholders, advisors and influencers to share insights, develop solutions and propel industry progress.  The Congress gathers the brightest minds in retail for engaging debates, valuable insights and meaningful connections, playing a critical role in shaping the future of global retail.  This year, the World Retail Congress will take place on 27th- 29th April at the Intercontinental Hotel in Berlin, with an agenda focused on “Retail’s roadmap to 2030”. For more information visit: World Retail Congress.

About the Advisory Board

Juliet Anammah is CEO of CG&R Strategy, advising start-ups and mid-size companies.  She is the former Chair and Group Chief Sustainability Officer at Jumia Group, the leading pan-African e-commerce platform and provider of marketplace, logistics and payment services. Based in the US, Juliet joined Jumia in 2015 as CEO having previously worked with Sanofi Aventis and then led Accenture’s Consumer Goods practice in West Africa.

Roy Bagattini is Group CEO of Woolworths Holdings, a leading retailer of fashion, beauty, home, food and financial services provider across South Africa, Australia and 10 other countries in sub-Saharan Africa and New Zealand through Woolworths, Country Road Group and Woolworths Financial Services. Based in South Africa, Roy joined Woolworths in 2000, having previously worked with Levis, SAB Miller and Carlsberg.

Gaston Bottazzini is the former CEO of El Corte Inglés, a Spanish group which includes department stores, fashion stores, supermarkets, financial services, travel and security services. An Argentinian national based in Spain, Gaston was previously CEO of Falabella, Latin America’s largest retail platform, following his earlier career with McKinsey.

Sergio Bucher is a Supervisory Board Member of Otto Group, a leading German-based international retail and services group, operating primarily in e-commerce, platforms and financial services. Sergio joined Otto Group in 2020 as Executive Board Member, Retail & Brands, managing a portfolio of brands including Crate & Barrel.  Prior to Otto Group, Sergio was CEO of Debenhams following an earlier career with Amazon, Puma, Nike, Inditex, Grupo Cortefiel and DuPont de Nemours.

Agustin Coppel is Chair of Grupo Coppel, Mexico’s largest private retail and banking organisation, whose operations include Coppel stores, BanCoppel and Afore Coppel. Based in Mexico, Agustin moved to the Chair role in 2025 after 17 years as Chair and CEO of the group.

Nobuo Domae is former Chair of Ryohin Keikaku, known for Muji, a Japanese specialty retailer offering apparel, household goods, and food through more than 1,400 stores worldwide. He served as President until 2024. Earlier in his career, he held executive positions at Fast Retailing, known for Uniqlo, including EVP and CSO/CMO, CEO of the USA, and President of Europe. Based in Japan, he currently serves as an Independent Director at Monex Group, Coop Sapporo, and Benesse.

Sally Elliott is Global Retail & UK Consumer practice leader at Spencer Stuart, the leading executive search and leadership advisory firm, where she specialises in Board and CEO succession across the global retail sector.  Based in the UK, she is the Chair of the World Retail Congress Advisory Board.

Jennifer Foyle is President, Executive Creative Director, American Eagle & Aerie at American Eagle Outfitters, a leading multi-brand specialty retailer operating nearly 1,500 stores across more than 30 countries. Based in the US, Jen joined American Eagle Outfitters in 2010 and assumed her current role in 2020. Prior to this, Jen held executive roles at Bloomingdales, Gap, J. Crew and Calypso St. Barth.

Fahed Ghanim is CEO of Majid Al Futtaim Lifestyle, a leading lifestyle retail business operating global brands across home, fashion, beauty and specialty retail in the GCC. Based in Dubai, Fahed joined Majid Al Futtaim in 2018 and assumed his current role the following year. Prior to this, he held senior leadership roles at L’Azurde, Al Tayer Group and SBIG.

William Kim is Chief Lifestyle Officer of Project B where he leads global lifestyle strategy across merchandise, brand collaborations, and cultural partnerships, integrating sport, fashion and community into an iconic global brand with an overall business model which is unique to Project B as the end to end model will be purpose built for future vs. today’s commerce model. Project B is an elite global basketball Grand Prix that is streaming and social native built for the new generation of fans. Prior to Project B, William was CEO of Shinsegae International (and CDO of Shinsegae Group), Rapha and AllSaints, in addition to earlier executive roles with Samsung, Burberry, Abercrombie & Fitch and Gucci Group.

Ian McGarrigle is Chair and Co-owner of the World Retail Congress which he founded in 2007.  Based in the UK, Ian has specialised in the retail sector for over three decades as a journalist, editor, publisher and founder of the World Retail Congress.

Judith McKenna is the former President & CEO of Walmart International, employing 550,000 associates across 23 countries for all Walmart’s operations outside the US.  Prior to leading Walmart International, Judith was EVP & COO for Walmart US, EVP of Strategy & Development for Walmart International, and CFO then COO of Asda UK. Originally from the UK, Judith now lives in the US. She is a Non-Executive Board member of Unilever and Delta Airlines.

Jaume Miquel Naudi is Chair & CEO of Tendam, a global European fashion group with 12 own brands such as Women’secret, Springfield, Cortefiel and Pedro Del Hierro, and more than 200 third party brands, managed through an omnichannel ecosystem that integrates digital with c.1,800 points of sale across 80 countries.  Based in Spain, Jaume joined the group in 2006, became CEO in 2016 and, in addition, Chair in 2019.  Before Tendam, Jaume worked at Timberland, Dockers and Levi Strauss.

Scott Price is Group CEO of DFI Retail Group, a multi-sector retailer based in Hong Kong operating 11,000 retail outlets in 13 different Asian markets. Before joining DFI Group in 2023, Scott worked at UPS, Walmart International, DHL and the Coca-Cola Company.  An American national based in Hong Kong, Scott is also an independent board director at Coles Group in Australia.

Régis Schultz is CEO of JD Group, a leading global omnichannel retailer in sports fashion and outdoor brands, operating over 4,500 stores locations in 36 countries. A French national based in the UK, Régis joined JD as CEO in 2022, having worked at Al-Futtaim, Monoprix, Darty, BUT, Kingfisher and Pernod-Ricard.

Frederico Trajano Inacio is President of Magalu, one of the largest retailers in Latin America and the largest digital retail platform in Brazil which includes 1,246 stores. Based in Brazil, Fred joined Magalu in 2000, following an earlier career with Deutsche Bank Securities and Westphere Equity Investors and was named CEO in 2015.

Libby Wadle is CEO of J.Crew Group, an internationally recognised and celebrated portfolio of American lifestyle brands, J.Crew and Madewell. Based in the US, Libby stepped into the role of CEO at J.Crew Group in 2020 and also serves on the board of directors. In her role, she has led the resurgence of the J.Crew brand and was a founding member of the Madewell team, where she helped bring the brand from a start-up to a leader in denim retail. Libby was awarded “Woman of the Year” at the World Retail Congress in 2025.

Hani Weiss is CEO of Max Fashion, a leading value-fashion brand within the Landmark Group, operating over 850 stores across 20 countries including a significant presence in the Middle East and India. A Lebanese national based in Dubai, Hani joined Max Fashion in 2025 following an earlier career with Majid Al Futtaim where he was CEO of the Retail business.

Jennifer Woo is Chair and CEO of The Lane Crawford Joyce Group, Asia’s premier fashion retail, brand management and distribution group comprising luxury department store Lane Crawford, fashion boutique Joyce, and fashion and beauty distribution business Imaginex Group. Based in Hong Kong, she is a member of the Court of the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and a board member of the Asia Art Archive. Jennifer was inducted into the World Retail Congress Hall of Fame in 2023.

Ying Xu is former President of Wumart, one of the largest omnichannel digitalised retailers in China with over 2,000 multi-format stores. Prior to joining Wumart in 2004, Ying worked with LG Chem/Tianjin International Investment Corp and Tianjin University of Finance & Economics.  Based in China, Ying is a Board member of Naspers, Prosus Group and Swire Pacific.

This announcement was first published by the World Retail Congress.