License to Transform: An Expectation to Deliver

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

License to Transform

An Expectation to Deliver

The role of the chief sustainability officer (CSO) is changing. Against a backdrop of political backlash and economic turbulence, the time for consensus building and goal setting is over — the priority now for CSOs is to forge ahead with implementing the transformation they’ve been given license to deliver.

We have found that the sustainability function — and its expectations — are maturing, and some companies are already
creating significant value from their progress so far. At the same time, CSOs are having to pivot in multiple directions to focus on priorities such as data, reporting and compliance.

In our latest annual report on the state of sustainability leadership, we examine these trends and propose key questions for CSOs and their teams to help them navigate this ever-evolving landscape.

DOWNLOAD
FULL REPORT

Key Findings

In partnership with Kite Insights, we surveyed and interviewed CSOs from leading organizations across a range of different sectors.

80
%

say their sustainability strategy forms a key part of the overall business strategy

71
%

believe that the sustainability strategy has material implications for the majority of employees in their business.

64
%

view their sustainability strategy as a way to create value, as opposed to 26% saying it reduces risks

35
%

say that their companies are delivering on their commitments and seeing substantial value in return

32
%

highlight complex or onerous reporting demands as a significant challenge

64
%

said their employees are having sustainability training and 30% more said they planned to invest in this within 12 months.

Related Insights:

Sustainability Stocktake: How CEOs Can Turn Vision into Value

There is much work to be done to ensure sustainability becomes a major source of value creation. Here's how CEOs can set up their CSOs for resiliency and success in a turbulent context.