Finding the Right CEO

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Finding the Right CEO

Originally published in the January–February 2022 issue of Harvard Business Review.

The best steppingstone to the corner office is changing. The vast majority of new CEOs still come from within: For example, in 2020, 77% of new S&P 500 CEOs were internal promotions. But whereas 20 years ago chief operating officers were the overwhelming favorites, accounting for 76% of such appointments, they have lost significant ground and look to be overtaken soon by another group of aspirants: division heads. According to a new study, however, neither cohort is the most likely to deliver outstanding results. “Leapfrog CEOs” — leaders appointed from one level below C-suite officers or division heads, with titles such as senior vice president and general manager — have the best odds of steering their firms into the top quartile of performers.

This article, published in the January–February 2022 issue of Harvard Business Review, highlights Spencer Stuart research looking at where CEO successors come from, the relative performance of CEOs from different backgrounds and how CEO aspirants can better prepare to outperform as CEO.

Access the article below by visiting hbr.org or clicking on the link to the pdf below.

Download full pdf

Related Insights

The Last Mile to the Top: Future CEOs Who Beat the Odds

CEOs who outperform prepare for success long before they get the job. Our new research highlights specific development advice for leaders on the four primary paths to CEO.

Read more

The CEO Life Cycle: A Study of Performance over Time

Very little data exists on how CEOs tend to perform over time. Featured in Harvard Business Review, our CEO Life Cycle study of 747 chief executives sheds some light.

Read more

Predicting CEO Success: When Potential Outperforms Experience

New research sheds light on the benefits and limits of prior experience, and how boards can select the CEO who is most likely to succeed given the opportunities and challenges the company faces.

Read more