Why Rookie CEOs Outperform

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Why Rookie CEOs Outperform

Experienced executives rely too much on old playbooks.

Is experience always better? Conventional wisdom suggests it is. When making a difficult decision, people tend to go with the “safe choice,” rather than a riskier option with a greater potential upside. In the boardroom, this tendency can translate into a preference for experienced CEOs in CEO selection. And, indeed, the share of S&P 500 CEOs with prior experience has grown from 4% to 16% since 1997.

The Jan-Feb 2021 issue of Harvard Business Review highlights findings from a Spencer Stuart study about the benefits and limits of potential and prior CEO experience. The study examined the performance of 855 S&P 500 CEOs appointed over a 20-year period, finding that CEOs with prior experience in the role underperformed first-time CEOs over the medium to long term. First-timers led their companies to higher market-adjusted total shareholder returns over the course of their tenure, with less volatility in the stock price. The study also provided advice to boards about how to select the CEO who is most likely to succeed given the opportunities and challenges the company faces.

Access the article below by visiting hbr.org or clicking on the link to the pdf below.

DOWNLOAD FULL PDF

Related Insights

The CEO Life Cycle: A Study of Performance over Time

Very little data exists on how CEOs tend to perform over time. Featured in Harvard Business Review, our CEO Life Cycle study of 747 chief executives sheds some light.

Read more

Predicting CEO Success: When Potential Outperforms Experience

New research sheds light on the benefits and limits of prior experience, and how boards can select the CEO who is most likely to succeed given the opportunities and challenges the company faces.

Read more

VIDEO

Highlights from the CEO Life Cycle

Watch this short video for highlights from our CEO Life Cycle research.

Watch the video