Target 2030: How the CMO helps fuel the drive for sustainability

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Target 2030: How the CMO helps fuel the drive for sustainability

By

Gülven Aytekin and

Angela Grammatikos

January 2026

| 5 min read

Authors

Gülven Aytekin

Istanbul

Angela Grammatikos

Frankfurt

No business leader is immune to the impact of sustainability — in all of its forms.

Finance and procurement professionals, for example, are more likely to view it as way of generating greater company efficiency or staying ahead of environmental regulations and thus avoiding the potential for fines or operational closures.

But for other executives, such as those hoping to be in a chief marketing officer (CMO) role by 2030, sustainability represents a key avenue to accelerate growth by strengthening the company’s reputation and helping develop new products that can better meet changing consumer preferences.

Sustaining sustainability

While short term strategies focus on immediate profits, thinking longer-term, such as taking actions that will lead to reduced carbon emissions, will spark improvements further down the line. This means that business leaders — such as the CMO — have to look for ways to strike a balance between the two objectives in order to achieve sustainable growth.

How CMOs can help do this is by exploiting their deep knowledge of consumer behaviour — detecting their preferences, deciphering market trends and, importantly, predicting what is looming over the horizon. But they can’t do this on their own. And they can’t do this without a clear understanding of the key actions and traits that will leave them best placed for success.

So, where should they focus their attention?

Stay purpose driven

The CMO’s role — both now and in 2030 — is shaped by the sheer complexity of the demands it faces. Ensuring that their organisation’s services and products chime with consumer preferences both now and in the future is a constant juggling act. One way of navigating this shifting terrain, though, is by being purpose driven — zeroing in on and staying consistent to the bedrock principles upon which their organisation is based.

Ensuring that their organisation’s services and products chime with consumer preferences both now and in the future is a constant juggling act. One way of navigating this shifting terrain, though, is by being purpose driven.

By incorporating sustainability into their purpose, CMOs — and their organisation — can stand out against their competitors while also ensuring that they are helping contribute to wellbeing for both current and future generations. This also aligns with Spencer Stuart’s Leadership Capability Assessment which identifies six capabilities that are essential to executive performance, two of which relate to driving results and leading change.

Break down silos

Many organisations are striving to break down functional silos to ensure they are better focused on the end-consumer. While such change programmes are nothing new — all successful businesses are in a state of perpetual motion to ensure they are aligned with the latest trends and priorities — the CMO has a critical role to play in driving this process forward.

Given that there is no C-suite executive more focused on the consumer, the CMO is best placed to generate better collaboration across teams, business units and geographies. It falls to them to ensure that the outputs of myriad specialist roles can come together to focus on what the consumer actually needs — both now and in the future.

Think strategically

No CMO can succeed without the ability to be an agile, forward-looking strategic leader. Using data points — often sourced from AI — and combining them with big picture societal shifts and the insights that accumulate from their own exposure to the ups and downs of the market, it is their responsibility to connect marketing strategies with business objectives over the short, medium and long-term.

Be a coordinator

As we outlined in our previous article on the 2030 CMO which looked at the role through the prism of technology, a key aspect of a CMO’s responsibilities is orchestrating the different levels of talent that exist in any diverse team. The same rule applies when considering the CMO and its intertwined relationship with sustainability.

By incorporating sustainability into their purpose, CMOs — and their organisation — can stand out against their competitors while also ensuring that they are helping contribute to wellbeing for both current and future generations.

When coordinating various elements of sustainability and societal impact, the CMO needs to bring together larger teams to cover different perspectives and expertise. Doing so requires emotional intelligence, empathy and excellent communication skills to ensure that everyone works collaboratively towards the same overall goal.

A unifying force

From climate transition to inequality, contamination to regulatory compliance, business executives have much to consider when it comes to sustainability.

Amidst the daily tumult, though, it is vital that leaders — such as the CMO — can think long-term, bring teams and individuals together and adjust their organisation’s strategy accordingly. By helping meet the evolving expectations of consumers, as well as those of employees and regulators, the spotlight on the CMO, now and in 2030, will remain intense and unrelenting.

But one suspects that talented and ambitious marketing leaders, keen to accelerate growth and contribute to a more sustainable future, wouldn’t have it any other way.

Reflections for marketing leaders

Is there agreement amongst the C-Suite about the importance of sustainability as a core business priority?

How can you balance the often competing demands that come from pursuing both short-term results and long-term goals?

Does the marketing function possess the necessary skills and experience to incorporate sustainability as key driver of business value and performance?

Authors

Gülven Aytekin

Istanbul

Angela Grammatikos

Frankfurt

Related Insights

Target 2030: Making a difference with marketing

4 min read

When it comes to the Chief Marketing Officer role in 2030, societal impact and ethical behaviour will help build trust and align with consumer values.

Beyond the boardroom: The enduring power of corporate affairs

12 min read

While their presence on executive committees is far from guaranteed, the role of corporate affairs directors has become increasingly complex and central to organisational decision-making,

Creating a Sustainable Culture

This series of articles offers a research-based, holistic view of the elements contributing to the creation of a sustainability culture.