2020 CMO Summit | Spencer Stuart

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

2020 CMO Summit

Highlights from our first virtual CMO Summit, where three global marketing leaders shared how they are managing volatility and disruption.

Facing a global pandemic, economic upheaval and societal change, top marketers around the globe have seen their jobs change quickly and immensely in 2020. Leadership in the midst of this volatility was the theme of our 18th CMO Summit, which, not surprisingly, was also transformed for 2020, convening for the first time in a virtual setting, with a uniquely global panel of leading marketers meeting via video: Janey Whiteside, EVP and chief customer officer at Walmart who joined from the United States; Silvia Lagnado, sustainable growth officer at Natura &Co, who was in Brazil; and Singapore-based Erica Kerner, SVP and head of marketing strategies and partnerships for ONE Championship.

The New CMO: ‘Showing Up’ in a Time of Crisis

Our 18th CMO Summit was transformed for 2020, convening for the first time in a virtual setting. We discussed how in the face of a global pandemic, an economic downturn and social upheaval, top marketers around the globe have seen their jobs change immensely — and quickly.

Read more

The 2020 CMO Summit

Watch the full video of the 18th CMO Summit, where three global leaders met virtually to discuss how they have led their teams in a time of disruption.

Watch Full 18th CMO Summit

Accelerating Digital

Janey Whiteside, EVP and chief customer officer at Walmart, discusses the rapid shift to digital during the COVID-19 crisis.

WATCH THE VIDEO

Maintaining Social Awareness

Silvia Lagnado, sustainable growth officer at Natura &Co, talks about the commitment to personal well-being and social issues.

WATCH THE VIDEO

Quarantine Learnings

Erica Kerner, SVP and head of marketing strategies and partnerships at ONE Championship, shares her insights from the SARS outbreak.

WATCH THE VIDEO

More from the 2020 CMO Summit

See more video commentary from our panelists on leading during unpredictable times by clicking here.

For additional insights on how other chief marketing officers have managed other issues and opportunities facing the marketing function, view highlights from past CMO Summits.