Leading at a Distance | Spencer Stuart

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Leading at a Distance: Practical Lessons for Virtual Success

Backed by the research and expertise of global leadership firm Spencer Stuart, Leading at a Distance provides executives with the necessary skills to successfully lead in the new virtual workplace.

Even as the COVID-19 vaccine brings growing hopes for a return to normal, most leaders recognize that regardless of the path, we are now in the early days of a dramatic, long-term shift in how work is done.

What does this “virtual revolution” mean for leadership? And what practical steps can leaders take to help navigate these issues?

Buy online:
Amazon Barnes and Noble Books-A-Million Wiley (non-US orders) Indigo

50
%

of employees will continue to work from home, even when things have stabilized

58
%

of employees say the shift to remote work has had a positive impact on work-life balance

64
%

of CEOs say remote work has had a negative impact on personal stress, compared to 34% of non-CEOs

In Leading at a Distance: Practical Lessons for Virtual Success, authors Jim Citrin and Darleen DeRosa provide hands-on, effective toolkit for answering these questions. Drawing our extensive in-field experience as well as more than 100 interviews with leading executives and a survey of more than 1,000 executives and organizations, this new book looks at some of the key questions confronting leaders preparing for a post-COVID world:

How to optimize the impact of virtual leadership

How to create positive experiences for employees and deliver sustainable results

How to hire, train, coach and promote employees virtually and integrate them into the fabric of the organization

How to shift business models, organizational structures and culture as the world continues to evolve

How to think about the return to the office and the future of work in a post-COVID-19 world

Related Insights

No Trust, No Team: Six Best Practices for Building Trust on Virtual Teams

More teams today are encountering pitfalls of remote and hybrid working, such as poor communication and a tendency toward silos. Here are six ways to combat these challenges by building trust.

Read more

Is Your Company Ready for the Future of Hybrid Work?

Hybrid or “blended” work is the future for many companies. Here’s how to avoid some of the potential pitfalls of this model.

Read more

Why the “why” is so important for virtual teams — and how leaders can help find it

Motivating people in a virtual or hybrid work environment is especially difficult. How you can help instill a sense of purpose and inspire your team.

Read more

Managing Technology‑Enabled Executive Onboarding and Transitions

Our best advice for managing executive onboarding and transitions virtually.

Read more

Virtual Team Leadership Program

Drawing on our extensive research into what differentiates top-performing virtual teams and leaders, we offer a virtual leadership program, which includes a series of nine interactive facilitator-led sessions on mastering virtual work environments.

Learn more

Leadership in Times of Crisis

Insights and ideas for leading during the COVID-19 crisis and beyond.

Read more