The Missing Voice: The Rise of CHROs on Boards

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The Missing Voice: The Rise of CHROs on Boards

Insights from HR leaders who are making an impact as board directors

As boards increasingly recognize the strategic value of human capital leadership, they recognize the immense value CHROs can bring as directors. In this series of profiles, we speak with CHROs who have served on boards to learn about the ways they influence boards, including how they bring unique expertise on critical areas such as succession planning, cross-functional insight and strategy. Ultimately, the boards that embrace CHROs as strategic partners — not just functional experts — are better equipped to manage risk, drive innovation and steward long-term value creation.

“Beyond the Job Description”: CHRO Peter Fasolo on Bringing Value to the Boardroom

Peter Fasolo, the former long-time CHRO at pharmaceutical giant Johnson & Johnson, has established himself as a valued director on three public boards.

Read more

CHRO Silvana Battaglia’s Boardroom Impact

Silvana Battaglia demonstrates the influence a CHRO can have as a board director that goes well beyond merely providing HR expertise.

Read more

CHRO Marcia Avedon’s Distinctive Boardroom Impact

Serving as a “CHRO-plus,” Marcia Avedon has become a valued director on several corporate boards.

Read more

CHROs on Boards: LeighAnne Baker on the Strategic Advantage

Bringing a strategic, enterprise-wide lens to every discussion, LeighAnne Baker demonstrates the immense value CHROs can bring to boards.

Read more

Governance in Action: Mirian Graddick-Weir on Elevating Board Performance Through Human Capital Strategy

HR leader Mirian Graddick-Weir shares insights from her experience as a board director for Yum! Brands and Booking Holdings.

Read more

The CHRO Imperative: Laurie Siegel on Strategic Board Leadership

As a CHRO in a board directorship, Laurie Siegel brings a rare combination of governance fluency, compensation expertise and cultural acuity to her boards.

Read more