2019 CMO Summit | Spencer Stuart

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

2019 CMO Summit

Highlights from the recent 2019 CMO Summit, where global marketing leaders discussed how to maximize team performance.

How can CMOs create and lead teams that will help their organizations consistently produce positive results? Three global leaders — Kellyn Smith Kenny, CMO of Hilton; Barbara Messing, former SVP & CMO of Walmart; and Diego Scotti, EVP & CMO of Verizon — shared insights on how to create more efficient, collaborative teams.

Key takeaways from the 2019 CMO Summit

At Spencer Stuart’s 17th CMO Summit, three leading CMOs shared invaluable insights and advice on how to make teams more efficient and collaborative.

VIEW EVENT HIGHLIGHTS

What Helps Marketing Teams Succeed?

In this interactive piece, senior marketing leaders share the state of their teams and offer a few ways to maximize their performance.

Read more

VIDEO

Nurturing future CMOs

Barbara Messing, former SVP & CMO of Walmart, says that great leaders, regardless of level, are the ones who embrace change.

Watch the video

Discussion highlights

Watch brief highlights from our CMO Summit as our panelists share stories about how they have built and sustained high-performing teams.

VIEW ALL VIDEOS

VIDEO

How different teams work together

Diego Scotti, EVP & CMO of Verizon, discusses the value of “interoperability” among different teams and functional areas.

Watch the video

VIDEO

Keeping pace with innovation

Kellyn Smith Kenny says that keeping pace with innovation requires a blend of data skills and good instincts.

watch the video

VIDEO

Redefining the CMO scorecard

Kellyn Smith Kenny, CMO of Hilton, talks about the importance of redefining success as a CMO.

watch the video

VIDEO

Transparent leadership

Barbara Messing points to openness as an important factor in getting the most out of your team.

Watch the video

More from the 2019 CMO Summit

See more videos from our panelists, as well as candid insights from audience members about building high-performing teams. Check out all the 2019 CMO Summit videos.

For additional insights on how other chief marketers have addressed the challenges and opportunities facing the function, view highlights from past CMO Summits.