The State of the CHRO

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The State of the CHRO

An analysis of FTSE 100 and Fortune 100 human resources leaders

April 2019

| 2 min read

The role of the chief human resources officer (CHRO) is becoming increasingly complex and is continuously changing due to a wide range of factors, including increased M&A activity, the growing use of technology, artificial intelligence, automation, the changing profile of the workforce and new ways of working. The profile of a CHRO has shifted from a traditional HR professional narrowly focused on his/her function to a well-rounded leader who can contribute meaningfully in all areas of the business.

So, who is today’s CHRO? For the past few years, Spencer Stuart has analyzed the backgrounds and demographics of CHROs in Fortune 100 and FTSE 100 companies. Our research dates back to 2016,* allowing us to see trends in several key areas:

Female representation

Non-traditional routes to the top

Experience outside HR

Internal appointments

International exposure

*The percentage increases and decreases reflect changes from 2016 to 2018. All other data is 2018.

The appointment of more female CHROs

While companies continue to struggle with gender diversity across the C-suite, organizations continue to appoint more females than males in the CHRO role. HR is uniquely positioned to help remove obstacles for gender diversity and develop a pipeline of female executives.

Non-traditional routes to the top

A number of recently appointed CHROs in the U.S. come from a non-traditional HR background, with a substantial portion of their work experience from outside of HR. With the pressures facing organizations today, the CEO and the board are looking for HR leaders with diverse expertise, such as running a P&L, to help deliver a competitive advantage. However, we see a difference in the UK, where far fewer CHROs came from non-traditional backgrounds and a growing percentage have spent at least half their careers in HR, which we define as “HR specialists.”

Non-traditional routes to the top

HR specialist

Decline in experience outside HR

The number of HR leaders who have experience outside of HR has dropped, which is worrying. Aspiring CHROs should try to gain diverse experience if they want to develop a well-rounded skill set for the top role and be seen as a valued partner.

The mix of internal appointments varies across geographies

In the U.S., the trend has steadily moved toward more internal appointments over the past three years, indicating that organizations have been able to build strong pipelines of potential successors. In the UK, where there have been a number of CHRO refreshes in the past few years, the majority remain external hires. The concern for many of these organizations is that there are not enough skills in-house to weather the business transformation journey, so they have been looking outside for seasoned HR leadership talent. We anticipate more demand for HR leaders with a strong track record of leadership development in order to build a pipeline within the function.

Drop in international exposure

We’re seeing a decline in the percentage of CHROs with international exposure, i.e., a different country of origin than the one in which they’re working, and education and work experience abroad. The drop has been more dramatic among U.S. companies.

To learn more about CHRO trends over time:

DOWNLOAD FULL PDF

We use analytics cookies that help us enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Please click on the "Accept all cookies" button to help us improve your user experience.

If you would like to know more about our use of cookies, click here.

Accept all cookies Allow only essential cookies
Manage preferences

Privacy Preference Center

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information
Allow All Manage Consent Preferences

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Performance Cookies

Performance Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by such partners to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store personal information directly but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back ButtonPerformance Cookies

Search Icon
Filter Icon

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Consent Leg.Interest
Switch Label label
Switch Label label
Switch Label label

Reject All Save My Preferences