A Conversation with Mats Granryd, Director General of the GSMA

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

A Conversation with Mats Granryd, Director General of the GSMA

Empowering the World through Mobile Technology

By

Bernhard Kickenweiz

March 2019

| 4 min read

Author

Bernhard Kickenweiz

New York

In 2003, there were one billion mobile subscribers. By the end of the current decade, that number will have skyrocketed to almost six billion.

For Mats Granryd, those numbers reflect far more than just an increase in the number of people using cellphones. The Swedish native — who is director general of the GSMA, the association that represents interests of mobile operators worldwide, and a member of its board — believes mobile can be a powerful force for equality, financial mobility and sustainability. And with the impending arrival of 5G, Granryd says mobile technology’s ability to affect lives is greater than ever.

Before taking the position with GSMA, Granryd was CEO of Tele2 AB and spent 15 years in a variety of roles at Ericsson, most recently as head of northern Europe and central Asia. He is also chair of the board of directors at Coor and a board member at Swedbank.

In his work with GSMA and the Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development, Granryd seeks to use mobile technology to increase financial inclusion, reduce poverty and fight gender discrimination. These are big issues, to be sure, but the optimistic Granryd is undaunted. He says the impending arrival of 5G technology will profoundly shift social and economic dynamics across the globe.

The theory sounds wonderful, but mobile companies already must react quickly to change and have strong direction in order to thrive in our complicated world. What other qualities must tomorrow’s leaders possess to lead their companies forward in this new environment?

That’s one of the questions Bernhard Kickenweiz asked when Granryd sat down with the Spencer Stuart team at Mobile World Congress in Barcelona to discuss issues facing the mobile industry. Other topics include how mobile technology could help alleviate global poverty, the role of innovative thinking in the industry and the importance of having a strong moral compass.

Spencer Stuart: The advent of cellphones was a huge paradigm shift and has dramatically changed how we live today. What will be the impact of 5G and other innovations, going forward?

Mats Granryd: All industries are currently being challenged, and in ways that go far beyond technology. For starters, generating cash isn’t simple for cellular companies, and they’re having issues creating the infrastructure for 5G without passing on the costs straight to consumers. But 5G will provide new revenue opportunities and business models, which will broaden the landscape. So that’s something we’ve seen and will continue to watch.

We believe that we are moving toward intelligent connectivity, which is one of the key themes at this year’s MWC in Barcelona. As consumers, we won’t see a big difference there; however, the possible ramifications of this change are massive. AI, big data applications, more connectivity through the internet of things and 5G — all of these changes will make this a brand new world. It’s exciting, but the pace of change is staggering.

How do modern companies have to change to keep up with the demands of innovation and the pace of change in order to support the societal changes you’d like to see?

One of the biggest issues is transparency. If you look at some of the agencies and institutions that started after World War II, such as the United Nations, the IMF and the World Bank, they were all built for a different time. The degree of transparency and inclusion will have to be different if they want to keep pace. It’s a simple equation, and it may sound harsh, but either you are part of the digital world and you have a future, or you are not and you don’t.

You’ve worked with several groups on initiatives that further the causes of inclusion, diversity and sustainability. How do you see mobile technology contributing to those causes?

We say that a connected society is a happy society, a society that thrives. Over the next several years, subscriber growth opportunities will be largely focused on connecting rural, low-income populations, and operators are working to create a range of sustainable solutions to deliver affordable connectivity to underserved communities. Mobile money helps lift people out of poverty — they become part of the financial community. It’s a way for them to produce goods, sell goods and get paid.

As for inclusion, we simply can’t leave anyone behind. Some estimates say that 200 million fewer women own mobile phones than men. That’s not right. And that’s a business opportunity, but it’s also a human right for women to be a part of the digital society, going forward. There is definitely a need to put equality on the agenda. There are fewer women in leadership roles. We need to do more to bridge the gap. Society will be more stable when it is more equal.

There is no other industry that’s better placed to help if we’re going to actually change the planet. That’s why we have a responsibility to try to bring about change and help people who need it. We are already the heart of the global economy. We should also strive to be its soul.

Given the industry’s rapid rate of transformation, as well as the importance of areas such as sustainability, what qualities do you think future leaders will need to have to lead their companies into the next decade?

We’re seeing more reliance on data, so new leaders must be fact based, able to interpret data and have a deep understanding of technology.

But those are largely table stakes. In a larger sense, it’s crucial that tomorrow’s leaders can see the bigger picture and understand how one’s work today affects what happens tomorrow.

Also, future leaders must understand that leadership is no longer as top-down as in previous years. They must be able to collaborate and build trust, as well as create an emotional connection with others.

And perhaps most importantly, they must have a solid moral compass, and it needs to be built-in and they need to profoundly believe it. It can’t just be lip service.

That makes perfect sense, but how do you evaluate for a moral compass when you’re hiring?

We’re now seeing that a company’s purpose is an important part of its mission — it’s no longer just a box you can check. It must be ingrained in the company’s DNA.

And so a leader must reflect strong moral character in everything they do. I should be able to recognize someone who should be at GSMA by how they walk in the streets, how they carry themselves and interact with others, as our values should be instilled in their every move.

Is it more important for telcom leaders to be innovators or operationally effective executors?

I think we need to be both, but the core skill set is running the shop. There is a new breed of CEOs coming up and many of them have been CFOs, which can be a mixed blessing. In my eyes, we need leaders who have soul and have the trust of others. We have to be transparent — it should be simple to get or drop our services. Regaining people’s trust will be key.

That said, we also need more visionaries — it’s about daring and trying. Sunil Mittal, the chair of Bharti Airtel, is a good operator, but he is also a visionary. Stéphane Richard, chair and CEO of Orange Group, is a visionary who is looking at providing access to mobile money not just on one network, but in a global, cross-industry context.

The ability to manage the day-to-day operations is crucial, but to truly take a company to the next level requires a leader who has a broad, unique and dynamic vision.

Author

Bernhard Kickenweiz

New York

We use analytics cookies that help us enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Please click on the "Accept all cookies" button to help us improve your user experience.

If you would like to know more about our use of cookies, click here.

Accept all cookies Allow only essential cookies
Manage preferences

Privacy Preference Center

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information
Allow All Manage Consent Preferences

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Performance Cookies

Performance Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by such partners to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store personal information directly but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back ButtonPerformance Cookies

Search Icon
Filter Icon

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Consent Leg.Interest
Switch Label label
Switch Label label
Switch Label label

Reject All Save My Preferences