CES 2020 | Spencer Stuart

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

CES 2020

We were on the ground once again at the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas to explore the latest trends — and what they mean for leaders across industries.

Every year at CES, we have seen how the pace of innovation has accelerated. Both disruptors and the disrupted face critical questions about how to adapt: Do we have the right leaders in place to anticipate and respond to emerging trends? How does our organizational culture need to evolve in order to stay ahead of the curve? Should we explore M&A opportunities in an increasingly competitive digital environment?

We had the opportunity to discuss these issues and more with a group of senior leaders and influencers — representing sectors including digital, technology, media, consumer, healthcare, industrial, professional services, private equity and automotive — at our exclusive event at the conference. Here are our takeaways from CES 2020:

Janine Ames

Jason Baumgarten

Tania L. Binder

Suzanne Burns

Lisa Caswell

Al Climent

Christie Coplen

John Davidson

Michel Hannas, Jr.

Rune Jörgensen

Bernhard Kickenweiz

Deb Op den Kamp

Heidi Sandreuter

Greg Sedlock

Amitabh Sharma

Kathleen Tamayo

Dave Vidor

Meg Wilson

Gus Zangrilli

Insights to help you navigate a rapidly changing world

The CEO Life Cycle: A Study of Performance over Time

Very little data exists on how CEOs tend to perform over time. Featured in Harvard Business Review, our CEO Life Cycle study of 747 chief executives sheds some light.

Read more

2019 U.S. Technology Spencer Stuart Board Index

An in-depth look at board practices and composition, director compensation and other information from top 200 U.S. tech companies.

Mapping the Future of Media Leadership

An interactive look at the changing world of media leadership and the skills needed for an industry in constant flux.

Read more

Growing Fast and Staying True: How High-Growth Tech Companies Scale Culture

Six takeaways from conversations with technology leaders about shaping corporate culture as companies grow.

Read more

Expanding Views on Leaders and Culture

Why culture adaptability may be more important than culture fit.

Read more

A Tale of Two Mergers: Seven Key Takeaways from Successful (and Unsuccessful) Mergers

How to get the people side of M&A right.

Read more