Spencer Stuart Leadership Transition Plan Takes Effect

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Spencer Stuart Leadership Transition Plan Takes Effect

Ben Williams Assumes CEO Role and David Daniel Assumes Chairman Role

October 2018

| 2 min read

Chicago, October 8, 2018 — Spencer Stuart, a leading executive search and leadership advisory firm, is pleased to announce that Ben Williams and David Daniel assumed the roles of CEO and chairman, respectively, with the start of the firm’s fiscal year on October 1, having been elected by the firm’s partners in May.

Williams succeeds Kevin Connelly, who served two three-year terms as CEO after previously serving six years as Spencer Stuart chairman. Daniel succeeds Edward Speed, who served two three-year terms as chairman. Speed previously led Spencer Stuart’s EMEA Board and CEO Practice, focusing on CEO search and succession.

Prior to becoming CEO, Williams led Spencer Stuart’s North American business and, before that, led its Financial Services Practice in North America. Before joining Spencer Stuart in 2010, Williams was president of the investment banking and capital markets broker-dealer of Wachovia, the nation’s fourth largest banking institution at the time.

“In a time of unprecedented change, organizations need exceptionally skilled leadership teams to interpret and respond to evolving business requirements, and cultures that support their strategic priorities,” Williams said. “Building on the work of Kevin and Edward, we will continue to enhance our ability to help clients make the senior-level leadership decisions that have a lasting impact on their organizations. I couldn’t be prouder to be a part of an organization that has such outstanding people and culture, and I’m humbled that our partners and colleagues have placed their trust in me as we continue to evolve and grow.”

Daniel most recently served as head of Spencer Stuart’s Private Equity Practice. He was CEO of the firm from 2001 to 2012, during which time he and the firm’s management team expanded Spencer Stuart’s global presence and strengthened its position in board and CEO advisory and recruitment, including CEO succession planning, and board and executive assessment.

“For more than 60 years, Spencer Stuart has been committed to continually enhancing our ability to advise clients on critical leadership needs, from executive and board recruitment to board effectiveness, succession planning, culture alignment, and team and organizational effectiveness,” Daniel said. “I’m honored to help support our partnership on that mission.”

About Spencer Stuart

At Spencer Stuart, we know how much leadership matters. We are trusted by organizations around the world to help them make the senior-level leadership decisions that have a lasting impact on their enterprises. Through our executive search, board and leadership advisory services, we help build and enhance high-performing teams for select clients ranging from major multinationals to emerging companies to nonprofit institutions.

Privately held since 1956, we focus on delivering knowledge, insight and results through the collaborative efforts of a team of experts — now spanning 57 offices, 30 countries and more than 50 practice specialties. Boards and leaders consistently turn to Spencer Stuart to help address their evolving leadership needs in areas such as senior-level executive search, board recruitment, board effectiveness, succession planning, in-depth senior management assessment and many other facets of organizational effectiveness. For more information on Spencer Stuart, please visit www.spencerstuart.com.