Point of View 2019 | Spencer Stuart

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Point of View 2019

As the business environment gets ever-more complex, competitive and faster-paced, having the right people working together toward the same goals is more important than ever. In this issue of Point of View, we look at how organizations can foster more effective top teams, make more informed leadership selection decisions, improve gender diversity and enhance the odds of merger success.

More CEOs today have prior CEO or board experience. Is experience better?

Common sense suggests that more experience is better, but our research finds no correlation between these backgrounds and shareholder value creation. How can boards determine when experience is better?

Read more

Unleash your team: 7 questions CEOs can ask to foster better teams

CEOs with high-performing teams take responsibility for the development of the kind of team the organization needs to achieve its strategic aspirations. Here are seven questions CEOs can use to start thinking about what’s working and what’s not in their team.

Read more

Culture fit versus culture adaptability

A growing body of research suggests that culture adaptability is as important as culture fit to understanding someone’s potential to succeed in an organization. How can you assess for culture adaptability?

Read more

How we got here: C-level women share the factors that contributed to their success

From sponsorship to risk-taking, four takeaways for increasing gender diversity from our survey of top women leaders.

Read more

The right fit: assessing first-time non-executive director candidates

Board appointments involve a long-term commitment, and mistakes can damage reputations and disrupt the work of the board. How can boards determine whether an executive with no board experience will have what it takes to contribute effectively in the boardroom?

Read more

Getting M&A right: lessons from successful (and unsuccessful) mergers

The real value of most deals stems from sharing best practices, innovation, the development of new products and solutions. What can we learn from successful mergers — and those that failed — about how to get the people elements right?

Read more

In addition to viewing individual articles, you may also download a PDF of the full issue.

Download Full Issue

Past Issues

To view past issues of Point of View, visit our Point of View archives.