Digital Health Innovation: A Leadership Pulse Check

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Digital Health Innovation: A Leadership Pulse Check

By

Katie M. Tucker,

Gregory J. Vaughn, M.D. and

Jason Hancock

January 2018

| 8 min read

Authors

Katie M. Tucker

Atlanta

Gregory J. Vaughn, M.D.

Atlanta

Jason Hancock

Stamford

From inside and outside of the industry, the most sought-after leaders are those adept
at driving innovation, leading change and adapting to organizational culture.

Empowering consumers to take greater control of their own health,
digital technology is tearing down the traditional boundaries among
providers, payers and patients, and thus dramatically changing
the demands for new leaders. Finding the right talent to meet the
expectations of an increasingly consumer-centric marketplace is
critical. Companies are looking well beyond the healthcare industry
to find the right mix of experience and perspective.

These and other insights on how digital is redefining healthcare
emerged in recent interviews between Spencer Stuart, one of the
world's preeminent leadership advisory and executive search firms,
and top industry thought leaders. These conversations confirmed
that healthcare companies seek leaders who are driving innovation
and championing change in ways that engage consumers, inform
and inspire employees and, ultimately, transform the organization
to thrive in an ever more digitally connected environment.

I’m as interested in someone who’s a technology leader in an industry that’s been
disruptive as I am in someone coming from a medical background. If I can marry that
person with someone on the team who understands the nuances of healthcare and
can help make sure we don’t make a silly mistake, that’s a powerful combination.

Todd Haedrich

vice president and general manager,

small groups at athenahealth

Because these are skills only recently leveraged in the healthcare industry, companies
shouldn’t fixate on recruiting the few with sector expertise, but should seek
out senior executives across industries who envision digital’s enormous potential
and can partner with domain experts to bring their visions to life. The value of this
cross-industry blending of skills and insights has proved highly successful in
numerous recent senior-level hires in healthcare.

More than just tech

Innovative leaders are driving the digital transformation of healthcare

As healthcare grows more consumer-centric, innovation — not just technology — is
driving the ultimate opportunity for convergence. Multichannel connectivity with the
patient, i.e., internet of things, is opening new lines of communication for sustained
consumer engagement.

That’s why senior executives who are proven innovators, especially in disruptive
industries, are highly valued today. Similarly, we see the same interest in individuals
who know how to drive and advocate for innovation within their organizations.
Equally prized are problem solvers who are gifted at change leadership, have an
open mind and the analytic ability to translate data into actionable insights that
improve patient outcomes and help control spiraling healthcare costs.

“I’m as interested in someone who’s a technology leader in an industry that’s been
disruptive as I am in someone coming from a medical background,” said Todd
Haedrich, vice president and general manager, small groups at athenahealth, which
provides network-enabled services to hospital and ambulatory clients. “If I can marry
that person with someone on the team who understands the nuances of healthcare
and can help make sure we don’t make a silly mistake, that’s a powerful combination.”

We want people who have more perspective, who’ve been in different industries
and can bring some of the knowledge they gained in developing technology in
those industries back into ours.

Tarek Sherif

chairman and CEO,

Medidata Solutions

Justin Barnes, a healthcare industry adviser and strategist and host of the industry’s
popular syndicated radio show, “This Just In,” believes it would be counterproductive
for companies to search only within the industry to find new leaders.

“They don’t all need to have a healthcare background, because if anything, it may
even inhibit your company,” Barnes said. “Let those leaders teach you something.
Find that person from another industry who says, ‘I would like to work for somebody
who can teach me about healthcare, so I can come in and revolutionize it.’”

Tarek Sherif, chairman and CEO of Medidata Solutions, a global developer of cloud-based
technology for clinical trial research, agrees that companies that limit their
candidate search to the healthcare industry are setting themselves up for failure.

“The supply of talent is limited, especially if you look to implement these leading-edge
technologies,” Sherif said. “You want to mix in different skill sets and
retrain folks. I don’t see a wholesale change, but I do see us broadening the scope of
the people we hire. We want people who have more perspective, who’ve been in
different industries and can bring some of the knowledge they gained in developing
technology in those industries back into ours.”

The rise of the healthcare consumer

From passive patients to proactive participants

The transformation to patient-centric healthcare is underway, with consumers literally
and figuratively taking their health into their own hands. They now have a
growing wealth of online information they can easily access 24/7 from their smart
phones, tablets and laptops, along with wearable devices ranging from smart
watches and wristbands to connected gym shorts and sneakers.

“Healthcare consumers are now able to do things on their own that they used to
have to go to a doctor’s office for,” said Haedrich. “With my smartphone and watch,
I can track my blood pressure, heart rate, sleep patterns and walking, and I can
monitor my overall health. So, we’re starting to see consumers being empowered
around their own health data, and that’s becoming increasingly important.”

As consumers become more informed and emboldened by digital, innovative healthcare
solutions, companies are beginning to recognize that care should be focused
around the patient, not the business.

“While it’s still early on, we’re changing the way we go to market,” said Diana Nole,
CEO of Wolters Kluwer Health, which provides information, business intelligence and
point-of-care solutions for the healthcare industry. “Instead of being a product-focused
company, we’re focused on solutions centered around the patient so that everyone
involved in caring for the patient, including the patient, understands how to achieve
the very best care. We have a large number of clinical experts, but we also need people
experienced in AI (artificial intelligence) and technologies that contemporize the
healthcare experience and optimize delivering that care to the patient.”

As companies strive to make billing more transparent at all points in the revenue
cycle, they will need to keep in mind patients’ concerns about sharing their private
health information online with their respective payers and providers.

Change Healthcare, one of the largest independent healthcare technology companies
in the U.S., is also focused on the healthcare consumer and the payers and
providers who serve them, said Kris Joshi, the company’s executive vice president
and president of network solutions. Digital solutions present an opportunity for the
industry to solve one of its most perplexing challenges — to make the patient billing
and payment process more manageable and transparent.

“Sometimes patients don’t know what to expect until the bill arrives. Someone gets
a bill for $4,000, and they’re scratching their head wondering, ‘Is this the correct
bill? What did the doctor or the surgeon or the nurse do that costs so much? Why do
I have to pay this and not my insurance company — or I may not have insurance.
And what am I going to do because I don’t have $4,000,’” Joshi said. “Discussions
about patient responsibility — what they will owe, to whom and when — should
happen upfront. ‘Here's what to expect, and here's the likely out-of-pocket payment
you will owe. Do you need financing?’ Providing that type of visibility for consumers
and among health plans, employers and providers is something we can all aim for.”

I think culture should never be a buzz word. It’s part of the DNA of any business. If
that’s not one of the top things an executive is thinking about every day, then I think
they’re going to miss the mark when they’re trying to transform or grow a business.

Chris Carter

general partner,

Hawthorne Capital

As companies strive to make billing more transparent at all points in the revenue
cycle, they will need to keep in mind patients’ concerns about sharing their private
health information online with their respective payers and providers.

“If we move to a system where everyone’s guaranteed insurability, maybe the transparency
issue won’t be as sensitive as it is now,” said Chris Carter, general partner at
Hawthorne Capital, a healthcare and technology-focused private equity firm based in
Atlanta. “Healthcare is so personalized that I think there are right ways to move data
and wrong ways to move data, but I think the uninsurable aspect would be in the top
three reasons, along with privacy and identity theft, for why anybody wouldn’t want
to share their health information more openly.”

Leading the transformation

Cultural fit is critical

Although it’s important for companies to look outside the healthcare sector to find
innovative leaders, candidates with all the digital experience in the world will fall
short of expectations if they’re not a good cultural fit.

“I think culture should never be a buzz word,” said Carter. “It’s part of the DNA
of any business. If that’s not one of the top things an executive is thinking about
every day, then I think they’re going to miss the mark when they’re trying to
transform or grow a business.”

The best leaders will be those capable of enhancing what already exists, and the
strongest players in the market today are differentiating their companies by building
a culture of change that is more mission-driven and able to adapt quickly to new
market challenges and opportunities.

“You need to think of senior leadership in terms of their ability to create effective
teams,” said Soroush Abbaspour, program director, strategy and business development
at IBM Watson Health Innovations. “To do that, you need a new culture,
a different culture, because you’re bringing people with different aspirations and
different expertise under one roof, working together. This not only requires a different
culture; it also requires a different structure and new mode of operation, and
it impacts everyone.”

User-friendly healthcare beginning to emerge

Although all the thought leaders we interviewed agreed
that the nation’s healthcare system is long overdue for a
major overhaul, a real-life example from Barnes provided
perhaps the strongest argument with a story about his
recent trip to Arizona to watch a sporting event.

“I get into a (ride-sharing service) driver’s car, and it’s
five dollars to go basically anywhere, and that’s great,”
Barnes recalled. “So, I ask the driver, “How can you
make any money doing five-dollar trips?” and he tells
me “I can do okay, but the real money is in healthcare.”

The driver went on to explain that in addition to driving
for the ride-sharing service, he was a driver for a local
hospital, which charged passengers $250 for virtually the
same service he provided to ride-sharers for $5.

“This is what we do in healthcare, and it underscores
why we have trillions of dollars of waste in the
industry,” Barnes said.

Much like ride-sharing shook up the conventional taxi
industry and Amazon continues to revolutionize retail by
leveraging digital technologies to deliver consumer
experiences better than traditional ones, the healthcare
industry is poised to provide a more user-friendly
experience for patients.

“We've seen this transformation in other industries,
whether it be travel or the purchase of cars, but in
healthcare, a lot of times, the sort of advances you've
seen on the patient side have been disconnected from
the clinical side or the hospital and physician office
side,” according to another senior digital health leader.
“What you're going to see is that connection, where the
patient engagement is going to be enhanced with
mobile and other online capabilities that providers are
now going to start to use.”

Michael J. Alkire, COO of Premier, a healthcare
performance improvement company helping
hospitals and health systems provide better patient
care and reduce costs, predicts that for many
healthcare organizations, digital transformation
will evolve in three phases.

“The first phase is performance: how to leverage
data across the entire enterprise,” Alkire said.
“Second is how are you taking advantage of these
integrated data sets and enterprise analytics to truly
drive very novel approaches for basic things like
resource utilization or comparing the effectiveness
of drugs and therapies. Finally, you have that
innovation bucket with an ecosystem that’s being
built out. So, how do you share knowledge, content
and best practices in this ecosystem.”

As digital continues to pervade the healthcare
industry, organizations should take note of — and
learn from — the experience of other industries.

“The question we need to ask ourselves is: If you look
at the disruption that’s been occurring in healthcare
— and it’s been occurring at a slower pace than other
industries — are we going to see an acceleration of
that with the rise of more patient-driven healthcare?”
said Haedrich. “What does the adoption curve look
like and how does it align with other businesses that
have been disrupted by technology over the last
several decades?”

It’s not about what digital can do
for companies, but what leaders
can do with digital

Based on data in the journal Health Affairs, every person will generate
more than 1,100 terabytes of health-related data in his or her lifetime.
The challenge for companies today, according to Abbaspour, is finding
the right blend of talent to leverage this massive amount of data to
provide the types of experiences that healthcare consumers expect
today and in the future.

The digital transformation of healthcare is underway and inevitable.
As digital continues to move forward, healthcare organizations
must remember that technology alone cannot and will not lead the
transformation. Technology is merely the enabler. The true driver will
be innovation — innovation managed and championed by senior
leaders who have the ability to create a vision and inspire the hearts
and minds of their teams to do things differently to drive overall
healthcare improvement.

Download

Download

Authors

Katie M. Tucker

Atlanta

Gregory J. Vaughn, M.D.

Atlanta

Jason Hancock

Stamford