Boardroom Best Practice

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Boardroom Best Practice

What makes an effective board?

Spencer Stuart has identified a series of best practices based on our extensive board advisory and director recruitment work with many of Europe’s leading listed companies; they are equally relevant for boards with a unitary or supervisory structure.

From this page you can access each chapter of Boardroom Best Practice separately. Alternatively, download an iPad-friendly PDF to access the complete publication.

Download the PDF

Introduction

What good governance looks like

1. The Board

The structure, purpose and responsibilities of the board

2. Board composition

From the mix of directors to the culture of the board

3. Induction and education

Ensuring that all directors are on top of their brief

4. Board leadership

Roles and relationships: the chairman, “deputy” chairman and CEO

5. Succession planning

Ensuring smooth and strategy-led succession – for the chairmen, CEO and directors alike

6. Board committees

Committee structure, remits and responsibilities

7. Managing meetings

The content, debate and dynamics of board meetings

8. When things go wrong

Handling crises and dealing with the fall-out

9. Measuring performance

The value of board effectiveness assessment

10. Beyond the boardroom

The board’s role in overseeing the company’s culture, purpose and social impact

Appendices

Further reading; Spencer Stuart Directors’ Forum; governance codes around the world

FURTHER READING

Board Governance Trends: A Global View

Spencer Stuart has long played an active role in corporate governance by exploring key concerns of boards and innovative solutions to the challenges they face. Our Board Indexes provide a comprehensive view of governance practices among leading public corporations in various countries, localities and industries.

READ MORE

Investors and the Board

Shareholder activism is gathering pace around the world. Five steps corporate boards can take to improve their relationship with investors.

Read More

What Do Boards Need to Know about Corporate Culture?

Boards can help foster long-term shareholder value by placing culture on the board agenda and ensuring management is forging a culture aligned with the business strategy.

READ MORE