What I wish I’d known… Leadership lessons from the top

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

What I wish I’d known… Leadership lessons from the top

By

Nicky Murray, CPsychol and

Cristina Barquero Guillen

September 2025

| 5 min read

Authors

Nicky Murray, CPsychol

London

Cristina Barquero Guillen

London

CEOs? They’re supposed to know everything, right?

After all, they’re at the peak of their professional powers. Their position is unsurpassed. They are looked up to and relied upon, the north star and ultimate decision maker for any organisation.

Well, yes, but no one is ever the finished article.

There are always new lessons to learn, fresh skills to master. Any leader who stops being curious, who prefers the solace of the status quo, will, in time, risk becoming less successful. This means that the best CEO will always be on a mission to keep learning, to stay ahead of the latest trends, to seek out new opportunities to hone their craft.

We have sat down with a group of current and former CEOs from around the world to hear about their experiences and learn more about the art and science of effective leadership. What unexpected insights emerged from their leadership journey and how did they influence their decision making?

Here’s what we found out…

1.	Make sure you have the right team

Mark Duckworth, CEO, Schroders Personal Wealth

One thing I would highlight is the speed by which a CEO has to get the right people in the right jobs. Do everything you can to get the best people because of the things that they will additionally bring to an organisation, on top of their role. Definitely get that done within three to six months.

That does not mean that we change all of the team at once — it’s about who would have the greatest impact given the task at hand and that will vary. Thinking that through like a jigsaw puzzle and the way you're going to put it together is fundamental. People tend to think it's all about the results. It's actually about the people that are going to get you the results.

2.	Be ready to delegate and empower

Jonathan Cole, former CEO, Corio

I came from a single discipline, running a team of lawyers and commercial specialists, so that was the big transition for me. Coming from a single disciplinary background where you knew what everyone was doing, you knew how to do it, you probably knew it better than they did, is not the way you can run a full P&L business with loads of different disciplines and hundreds of people distributed all over the world. You must have a much more distributed mentality and be much more willing to give up control and awareness of what's going on. Until then, it was my attention to detail and ability to control that probably made me successful.

3.	It’s all about the delivery

Francisco Lanzuela de Alvaro, CEO of Hugworld International Distribution

Innovations require more than just supportive words — they need the right resources too. There is a difference between supporting something and actually making it happen So as well as sufficient resources there needs to be a big focus on communication and implementation as well.

Quote

Don’t see the board as people who are there to score you out of 10 — see them as experienced colleagues whose collective knowledge you can tap into."

Alex Vaughan

CEO,
Costain

4.	Purpose matters

Janet Taylor-Hall, CEO, Cognia

One thing I learned about myself is how important it was to me to be tapping into something meaningful. In founding a company, you are creating opportunities and employment, you're solving problems rather than just progressing the agenda of private equity investors or the partners of the firm. I personally found that really inspiring. Being a CEO can be one of the loneliest jobs in the world. But what sustains me is waking up in the morning feeling that I have something important to do.

5.	Reset your relationship with the board

Alex Vaughan, CEO, Costain

One of my biggest learnings is I didn't use the board properly when I got the job. I thought I had to prove myself but what I should have done is spend more time being a bit more open with them about some of my thoughts, rather than going too fast. Although it’s natural to want to hit the ground running, it’s better to take time to bed into the role and really understand the business. Don’t see the board as people who are there to score you out of 10 — see them as experienced colleagues whose collective knowledge you can tap into.

6.	Don’t forget the frontline

Aylin Somersan Coqui, CEO, Allianz Trade

It's so important to be on the ground. I don't just mean people meeting with the customers, I mean people who are doing their daily activities, what they do and how they feel, because when you are a CEO, you can become more and more detached from the reality of the organisation. Every single time I make customer calls, sit next to people, just shadow colleagues doing their job, I learn something. The more you're in touch with the frontline people, the more you really understand what's going on and this really helps me make decisions. And I ask my management team to do the same.

7.	Work internationally if you can

Nick Harris, CEO, National Highways

I’ve worked in countries like Chile, The Philippines, The Gaza Strip, Lebanon and Jordan. I discovered that learning languages is more than just a communication methodology — it’s an insight to a culture. Working internationally also gave me a huge opportunity to experiment and try things, make mistakes and survive them. In my case, I got to learn all about setting up HR, finance and accounting — which I wouldn’t have done if I had stayed as an engineer in the UK.

8.	Philosophy can help win hearts and minds

Magdalena Smith, CEO, Behaviour Lab

Quote

The more you're in touch with the frontline people, the more you really understand what's going on and this really helps me make decisions."

Aylin Somersan Coquin

CEO,
Allianz Trade

I have been surprised by how useful my philosophy degree has been. As we progressed, as we built tools and worked together to form all these common understandings, what was clear was the role of assumptions. You could sit in the same room and think that everyone is completely aligned with what has been said and what needs to be done, only to discover that is not the case. To not make these kinds of mistakes, it did go down to a level of philosophical thought, creating the logic in order to truly understand that what you really wanted to have done. It sounds surprising, and I never expected to go into that depth, but we live and learn.

9.	Brace for the intensity

Alistair Elliott, former senior partner and chair of Knight Frank’s Group Executive Board

I went from looking after a business that had 1,000 to 1,200 people in the UK to a business that had 3,000 people in the UK, including the residential business, as well as several hundred offices around the world. The bit I underestimated was the intensity. Travel very often started on a Sunday and finished on a Saturday morning or absorbed the whole weekend because it was a long haul or multi country trip. And all the time you're away, despite the improving technology, issues would inevitably be gathering back at home which you can't really deal with in the way you would like until you return. Realising you couldn’t do it all was a crucial part of my learning.

10. Credibility is crucial

Pramukh Jeyathilak, CEO, TalentLign

I need credibility to have meaningful conversations. This is where I think all of my experiences from the past, the great organisations that I work with and worked for, have given me credibility. At the end of the day, outcomes and results matter. Not one of those companies were giving me a bonus for just managing a process. They were rewarding me, and I was growing an organisation, because I was delivering results — and that is what has made me credible.

11. Pick your battles

Charles Perry, co-founder and former managing director of Second Nature

I have typically really thrived and enjoyed working with and nurturing the people below me — I remember what it was like being one of them and I'm quite empathetic when it comes to the people that I'm working with. But as a leader you also have to pick your battles and really master the art of diplomacy, becoming wise to which battles are worth fighting and which aren't. And you just got to know when to do it and when it's worth doing it.

Quote

As a leader you have to pick your battles and really master the art of diplomacy, becoming wise to which battles are worth fighting and which aren't. And you just got to know when to do it and when it's worth doing it."

Charles Perry

Second Nature,
Co-founder and former managing director

12. Don’t flinch from a challenge

Adam Craker, CEO, iqbusiness

My nature is to run towards problems, not run away from them. There have been many situations where this approach that has really galvanised my team; when a situation erupts and before they can respond, they see me running towards it. If anything, I've been criticised sometimes for not thinking enough about the problem that I'm running towards.

13. To understand your team, you have to understand yourself

Chris Meyer, former CEO, Lesaka Technologies

To really understand people and teams and what drives them and how to motivate groups of people, you need to really understand yourself and your own drivers, strengths and weaknesses. I call them ‘superpowers’ — what it is that I can bring to a team, strengthen a team and so on.

14. Don’t micromanage

Graham Mason, former CEO of Eastspring Asset Management

I had some very good managers that I reported to during my career. I knew they believed in me, I knew that if I needed extra resources they would support me. While I was clear about the ground rules and delivery that they expected from me, they also gave me the freedom to get on with things. So I learned early on about the importance of giving team members the space to operate.

15. The power of patience

Dirk Ackerman, CEO, The IQ business group

Decision making happens at different speeds. You’ve got to be patient when you’re working with less experienced team members — it may take a little longer than you might originally expect.

Authors

Nicky Murray, CPsychol

London

Cristina Barquero Guillen

London

Related Insights

Four ways CEOs can preserve their emotional energy

August 2025

5 min read

How can CEOs maintain their emotional energy? Coaching, teamwork, health and R&R should all loom large in their list of priorities.

Closing the Confidence Gap: Why the Board-CEO Relationship Needs a Reset

April 2025

8 min read

CEOs are more equipped to deliver long-term value creation when their board balances accountability with support. Here’s how to get the balance right.

Taking a creative approach to CEO leadership

July 2025

8 min read

Fostering creativity and innovation across their organisations can help CEOs capitalise on opportunities and drive growth — but how can they do this?