The CHRO Imperative: Laurie Siegel on Strategic Board Leadership

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The CHRO Imperative: Laurie Siegel on Strategic Board Leadership

By

Fleur Segal

October 2025

| 5 min read

Author

Fleur Segal

Boston

SectionsIn this article

Key findings

CHROs bring a critical lens to strategy discussions, one that connects ambition to execution, with an appreciation of the organization’s talent opportunities and risks.

Siegel brought skills and insights that no one else could about competitive compensation and HR systems which is critical for operating in a fast-changing industry.

Siegel’s ability to connect strategy to execution, advocate for talent as a strategic lever, and lead with clarity and courage has made her indispensable to the boards she serves.

In an era where boards are expected to anticipate disruption, guide transformation and steward leadership succession, the value of strategic human capital insight has never been greater. And yet, CHROs remain underrepresented in boardrooms: Only 9% of S&P 500 CHROs sit on a public company board.

Laurie Siegel, a former HR leader at Tyco International who has spent the last decade serving on the boards of FactSet, CECO Environmental and Lumen Technologies, is showing how CHROs can elevate board performance across the enterprise. Siegel brings a rare combination of governance fluency, compensation expertise and cultural acuity to her boards, leaving an impact on areas ranging from CEO succession and onboarding to AI governance and investor engagement.

We recently sat down with Siegel to learn more about how her unique expertise has helped bring great value to her boards.

Strategy, risk and succession: The CHRO lens

Siegel believes CHROs bring a critical lens to strategy discussions, one that connects ambition to execution. There’s often a blind spot in the connection between strategy and execution, Siegel said, including an underappreciation of the organization’s talent risk.

“Do we have the skills?” she said. “Are they in the right places? What kind of culture is required to fulfill the strategic shift?”

Siegel also preaches discipline and process when it comes to CEO succession.

“Boards rate themselves poorly on succession,” Siegel said. “CHROs bring the muscles and processes needed to fulfill the board’s charter around talent.”

Boardroom impact: A peer’s perspective

Robin Abrams, chair of the FactSet board and former CEO of Verifone, who has held senior roles at Apple, Palm and Accenture and currently serves on the Lattice Semiconductor board, has seen Siegel’s influence firsthand. She said that Siegel brought skills and insights that no one else could about competitive compensation and HR systems which is critical for operating in a fast-changing industry.

Abrams credits Siegel with leading the CEO recruitment process, managing internal and external dynamics with finesse, and shaping the onboarding experience. Siegel also initiated skip-level interviews with employees to surface insights and talent, a move Abrams says, “many board members wouldn’t have been brave enough to do.”

“If your board is facing any two of the following, CEO succession, culture transformation, talent strategy or global capability expansion, you need a strategic CHRO on your board,” Abrams said. “She brought clarity to what elements of the culture were worth preserving and those that weren’t.”

Siegel’s contributions extended well beyond HR. Abrams said that Siegel helped shape FactSet’s approach to AI governance, pushing for co-ownership between the CHRO and CTO.

Her leadership in sales compensation reform, investor engagement and board assessments further illustrates her broad strategic reach.

“Laurie pushes the CHRO to be more strategic by asking what deliverables should look like both today and three years from now, and how to communicate that,” Abrams said.

Governance and board effectiveness

Siegel has championed peer-to-peer board assessments and investor listening tours. She has demonstrated adeptness at speaking with investors about the company and the board’s strategic oversight. And with her boards, she helps the board think more diagnostically about future needs.

That reflects Siegel’s personal drive to be a full contributor and strategic thinker on her board, and not just the resident HR expert.

“You are not a niche player on a board,” Siegel said. “If you are, you’re under-serving.”

• • •

Laurie Siegel’s board career offers a blueprint for how CHROs can operate at the highest levels of governance. Her ability to connect strategy to execution, advocate for talent as a strategic lever, and lead with clarity and courage has made her indispensable to the boards she serves.

As companies face accelerating change, boards must evolve too. That evolution demands directors who understand not just the business, but the people who power it. CHROs like Siegel don’t just belong in the boardroom; they make it better.

Author

Fleur Segal

Boston

Related Insights

Governance in Action: Mirian Graddick-Weir on Elevating Board Performance Through Human Capital Strategy

5 min read

HR leader Mirian Graddick-Weir shares insights from her experience as a board director for Yum! Brands and Booking Holdings.

The Missing Voice: The Rise of CHROs on Boards

We profile several CHROs who have served on boards, to look at the outsized impact they can have on the board’s governance.

CHROs on Boards: LeighAnne Baker on the Strategic Advantage

5 min read

Bringing a strategic, enterprise-wide lens to every discussion, LeighAnne Baker demonstrates the immense value CHROs can bring to boards.