South Africa CFO Route to the Top

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

South Africa CFO Route to the Top

By

Lisa C. Mariano and

Ryno Matthee

June 2018

| 4 min read

Authors

Lisa C. Mariano

Johannesburg

Ryno Matthee

Dubai

Introduction

This study is the first detailed analysis to look at
the profiles of CFOs at South Africa’s top listed
companies by market capitalisation, the JSE Top 40.

Our research has produced fascinating data about
the profiles of CFOs and the routes they have taken to
reach the top of their function. We have paid particular
attention to CFOs’ background, functional experience,
diversity, education and professional qualifications.
We also take a look at the CEOs of JSE Top 40
companies with backgrounds in finance leadership.

We end our report by comparing South African CFOs
with their counterparts in Australia, the UK and the US.

KEY FINDINGS

Diversity

While our research reveals that their careers have taken a variety of trajectories, there is a conspicuous lack of diversity
among JSE 40 CFOs.

Ethnicity

Nine (22.5%) of the TOP 40 CFOs are from a broadbased black ethnicity group.

Gender

Only three out of 40 CFOs are women. While the percentage
of female CFOs is low in most markets, the situation
in South Africa is of particularly concern.

Nationality

Of those CFOs whose nationality we have been able to
confirm, only 15% are not South African nationals. These
five non-nationals come from Australia, Germany, Greece,
Netherlands and Zimbabwe.

Age

JSE 40 CFOs range from 36 to 61 years old, with an average
age of 49. Two-thirds of CFOs are between 46 and 55
years old.

Internal vs. external appointments

Two-thirds of JSE Top 40 CFOs were appointed to their
roles from inside their companies. Leading South African
companies appear to have a strong enough pipeline to
enable a smooth succession in the leadership of the
finance function. They benefit from the continuity that
comes with appointing an internal candidate, as well as
the positive signals this sends to high-potential, future
leaders of the finance function.

Out of the seven CFOs appointed during 2017, four were
internal and three external candidates.

Development areas for companies to consider

With two-thirds of the current cohort of CFOs being internal appointees, many JSE Top 40 companies
appear to focus on finance talent management with an eye to CFO succession. However, we recommend
that all companies should be regularly reviewing their pipeline of high-potential finance professionals, steering
them towards the kind of roles that will position them to be credible candidates for CFO when the time
comes. We recommend that companies ask themselves the following questions:

How do we encourage gender and ethnic diversity at all levels within our finance organisation?

How do we expose high potentials to the challenges of high-impact communication and
stakeholder management?

How do we make sure that our best finance professionals do not fall into the “specialisation trap”? How can we develop their skills and experience by offering them business or functional roles outside their comfort zone?

How do we rotate high-potentials through roles in the corporate centre?

How do we help finance professionals gain international exposure, especially experience living and
working abroad?

Tenure

The average tenure of CFOs is 4.1 years. Those in the
financial services sector have the longest average tenure
at 5.2 years (the CFOs at Capitec Bank Holdings and
Investec have both been in the role for at least 15 years).
The current average tenure of internally appointed CFOs
is 4.4 years, compared with 3.5 years for external hires.

Previous role

Internal vs external

Of the nine CFOs with prior experience as a Group CFO,
six were external and three were internal appointments.
While external hires were mainly drawn from the ranks of
CFOs and general management, around one quarter of
these appointments came out of professional services/
audit firms.

JSE Top 40 CEOs with CFO experience

13 of the current JSE Top 40 CEOs previously held a Group CFO role. Nine of these had been CFO of the same
company they now lead, and six were appointed to CEO directly from the CFO role.

Two CEOs had been the CFO of a non-listed company, whereas 11 had JSE CFO experience.

CEOs who had previously been CFO of the same company had served as CFO for 5.7 years on average before
taking on the top job.

Finance function experience

Nine of the JSE Top 40 CFOs (22.5%) had prior experience
as a Group CFO. 45% were either a group CFO or a
divisional/regional CFO immediately prior to their
appointment. A further 20% were in a managing director
or other general management role.

Career experience

The current cohort of JSE Top 40 CFOs have occupied a
wide range of roles during the course of their careers.
78% have worked in a professional services firm, although
this is explained by the fact when most of the current
CFOs were starting out, a three-year stint at an audit firm
was a prerequisite for becoming a chartered accountant
in South Africa or for a career in finance. It is interesting
to note that while most CFOs have spent the majority of
their careers in finance roles, 61% of CFOs have had at
least one non-financial role during their career.

International experience

Forty-five percent of CFOs have worked outside South
Africa at some point in their careers.

Education & qualifications

Ninety percent of CFOs have a Chartered Accountant
qualification. 22.5% of CFOs have a postgraduate degree
(Masters, MBA or PhD).

Board membership

All JSE Top 40 CFOs sit as executive directors on their own boards. Seven CFOs hold a non-executive directorship
on another listed company board; one CFO sits on two outside boards while another sits on four outside boards.

International Comparison

Size of sample
JSE Top 40
ASX 100
FTSE 100
Fortune 500

Internal / external appointment
67.5% / 32.5%

49% / 51%

48% / 52%

62% / 38%

% of women
7.50%

11%

11%

13%

% of foreign citizen
15%

20%

23%

N/A

Average tenure
4.1

5

4.5

5.6

Average age
49

51

52

52

Function Acronyms

Grp CFO/CFO
Group CFO

Dep CFO
Deputy CFO

Div/Reg CFO
Divisional or Regional CFO

FP&A
Financial Planning and Analysis

GM/MD
General Manager/Managing Director (including COO and Group/Regional/Divisional CEO)

CD/M&A
Corporate Development/Mergers & Acquisitions

Grp Ctrl
Group Financial controller

IR
Investor relations

ONF
Other Non-Finance (Banks, Non Finance Roles, etc.)

OGF

Other Group Finance (Reporting, Accounting, Planning, Strategy, FP&A)

PS
Professional Services/Accounting Firms

OFNG Reptg/Actg/Ctrl

Other Finance Non-Group (Including Financial Reporting/Accounting/Control)

Treasury
Treasury

Tax

Tax

Industry Acronyms

CON
Consumer goods and services

FS
Financial services

IND
Industrial

TMT

Technology, media and telecommunications

METHODOLOGY

Our in-depth research draws on information in the public domain and on our knowledge of
the backgrounds of individual CFOs. This has enabled us to examine specific roles that
CFOs have undertaken inside and outside the finance function, identify patterns and
consider the range of experience that may be required of CFOs in the future. The data is
based on an analysis of the JSE Top 40 companies incorporated in South Africa as at
1 March, 2018. In the case of CFOs who were promoted from interim or acting CFO roles,
we consider their start date when they began their interim role.

Download

Download

Authors

Lisa C. Mariano

Johannesburg

Ryno Matthee

Dubai