Successful Digital Transformation: The Chief Digital Officer's first steps

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Successful Digital Transformation: The Chief Digital Officer's first steps

June 2016

| 2 min read

Patrick Hoffstetter, chief digital officer at Renault and director of the Renault Digital Factory, and Tanya Cordrey, former chief digital officer at Guardian News and Media (GNM), talk to Spencer Stuart about guiding their organisations through digital transformation. In this video, Hoffstetter and Cordrey outline how a digital strategy will take effect on multiple fronts. Building cross-functional teams is essential, as is building products for users inside the organisation, not just for those outside.

Video Transcript

Cordrey

When I started at The Guardian, it was in a really interesting spot. It’s not fair to say that The Guardian had not been doing anything digital. If anything, they had been very early on in their embracing of digital, so I was very fortunate that The Guardian had lots of digital nous and enthusiasm and excitement. But what it needed was steering in the right direction in terms of the strategy, skillset and execution.

The digital strategy we pursued in terms of our products was to ensure that we could get the journalism into the hands of our users, so we embarked upon rebuilding the whole product portfolio, to ensure that we had the right apps, the right website, the right presence on places like Google and Facebook to reach the users, and hopefully to engage them and bring them back to The Guardian time and time again.

It wasn’t just building products that were great for users outside The Guardian; we realised that we had to build great products inside The Guardian for the journalists. The role of the journalist was changing so dramatically, but they had the same old clunky content management systems that really supported the days of the newspaper.

Hoffstetter

My first job was to set up a digital strategy for the company. At that time I was in charge of both B2B and B2C aspects. At the same time, we worked on the organisation and set-up of the Digital factory which is basically quite unique. It is a 360 team at HQ level, a mix of people from IT, sales, marketing and product – they called it a Noah’s Ark.

We tried to undertake the various pieces a digital transformation – on the B2C side, we focused on launching a mobile strategy, launching a social strategy, developing a global platform standardisation, which then evolved into an important strategic alliance project called Helios that I undertook with my colleague from Nissan. It was aimed at having our almost 300 websites across the globe for all the brands under the alliance under one single platform. And for the past 12-18 months, I’ve been working with different counterparts, including people from the strategy department on a more medium and long-term vision for our digital strategy and digital acceleration, bringing some input on the way Renault potentially is going to be disrupted on the one hand, or opportunities coming from digital for new business models.

For additional chief digital officer insights, view other videos in the series.

We use analytics cookies that help us enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Please click on the "Accept all cookies" button to help us improve your user experience.

If you would like to know more about our use of cookies, click here.

Accept all cookies Allow only essential cookies
Manage preferences

Privacy Preference Center

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information
Allow All Manage Consent Preferences

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Performance Cookies

Performance Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by such partners to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store personal information directly but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back ButtonPerformance Cookies

Search Icon
Filter Icon

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Consent Leg.Interest
Switch Label label
Switch Label label
Switch Label label

Reject All Save My Preferences