Changing Places: What Functional Leaders Can Learn from One Another

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Changing Places: What Functional Leaders Can Learn from One Another

By

Thomas T. Daniels and

Katie M. Tucker

December 2016

| 8 min read

Authors

Thomas T. Daniels

New York

Katie M. Tucker

Atlanta

You’ve heard the stereotypes and, in a frustrated moment, may
even have uttered one or two of them yourself:

Manufacturing is prepared to make any product you like as long as
it’s black.

HR cares more about having the latest training program than
about business results.

Legal should not be involved until it is strictly necessary, otherwise, they will “prevent business.”

Finance leaders are focused on the numbers, not the business, and they don’t collaborate well.

The sales team is made up of “target beaters,” focused on volume
but not operations or credit issues.

Marketers are enamored of big ideas and cool creative, but lack
financial and analytical skills.

Procurement just wants to buy as cheaply as possible, even if it
causes a problem in the factory.

IT are tech geeks advocating technology for technology’s sake, or
the “help desk” to be called only when there is a glitch — either
way not very strategic.

R&D comes up with amazing concepts that nobody can
actually build.

As they move to more senior roles, executives in
finance, marketing, IT, legal, HR and supply chain tend
to develop distinct skill sets, vocabularies, mindsets
and styles. These differences in styles, language and
priorities across functions — the nuggets of truth that
drive the stereotypes — can sow distrust, get in the
way of hearing one another’s ideas or perspectives, and
keep leaders from working together effectively. They
also can prevent leaders from learning useful ideas and
approaches from one another.

Yet the ability of top leaders to learn from one another
and collaborate across functions and businesses has
never been more important, as the most significant
challenges facing organizations — business transformation,
innovation, dynamic competitive and market
threats, and increasing customer expectations —
demand shared objectives, creative thinking and, often,
a coordinated approach. Mobile, for instance, requires
a “triangulation of all forces from customer experience
to technology to marketing to sales to think about it,”
said Erik Pearson, executive vice president and chief
information officer for IHG. Leaders who understand
the priorities, language, styles, strengths and weaknesses
of other functions and business units are at a
distinct advantage as the dependencies across the
organization grow.

Drawing on data about the skills/styles of functional
leaders, our experience assessing them and conversations
with executives who have gained experience in
multiple functional areas, we look at what functional
leaders can learn from other functional areas and
provide advice for integrating diverse perspectives to
improve individual and team performance.

Getting past the stereotypes

Serving in another functional or business leadership
role for a period of time is one way to see other functions
in a new light as well as the limitations of your
own experience. When he moved to general management
from human resources, Juliano Marcilio was able
to combine his expertise in talent management with a
new view of the challenges of the business — specifically,
the need for the sales organization to evolve in
response to the company’s new, more complex multiproduct
strategy. Under his leadership, the unit
changed the profile for new sales team hires, oversaw
the creation of new training programs and implemented
significant changes in compensation and
incentives, improving the performance of the business
unit. “By applying a much more insightful HR strategy,
we managed to change the game,” he recalls.

Returning to an HR leadership role a few years later —
as head of human resources for HSBC Bank Brasil —
Marcilio drew on his general management experience
to realign HR performance measures to the performance
of the business. Creating measures for
assessing the quality of management, they determined
that, indeed, good managers had better business
results, and learnings from that work fed improvements
to the HR processes of the whole bank.

Like Marcilio, Alfredo Ferrari, now CEO of Siqueira
Castro Advogados, found himself having to think differently
when he moved from legal to general management.
“I thought I could apply my legal training and
modus operandi directly to GM. Being a GM is a
different ballgame from my previous legal experience.
A corporate lawyer sometimes does not have a full
operational view of the business. A lawyer thinks,
analyzes and ponders variables. A GM needs to say
‘yes’ or ‘no,’ has to take decisions and make them
happen, has to forecast what is the best for the business,”
he said. But Ferrari also found that his knowledge
of the law and ability to consider tradeoffs allowed
him to more confidently weigh risks and decide which
risks to take. “A ‘normal’ GM would probably be more
cautious, unsure about the true consequences for the
company and maybe himself. On the other hand, when
I said that something could not be done, my business
team understood it.”

View full image

These kind of experiences that provide deep insight in
new areas of the business or fresh ways of thinking
from another functional or business area can be transformative,
said Pearson, who went from a global team
role running the internet business to a regional CMO
role and ultimately into the CIO role. “Your ability to
have a broader impact and influence organizationally
on the company improves when you move from function
to function or from the U.S. to China. It enhances
your understanding of customers in different markets
and different demographics and how that impacts your
business decisions as well as your technology decisions,”
he said. “These experiences also can increase
the ‘speed of trust’ — accelerate trust in the organization
so that people can make decisions faster and actually
go to market faster.”

But even without changing roles, leaders can find ways
to gain important insights that lead to new ideas and
improved ways of working, breaking through stereotypes
and political and bureaucratic divisions that get
in the way of doing what’s right for the business.

“Solutions can emerge when you bring people together
and get at what’s driving those perceptions,” said
Richard Ware, who began in Mars R&D function, later
spent time in supply chain and procurement, and now
heads up supply chain, R&D and procurement for the
company. For example, insight from marketing about
the drivers of consumer decision-making helped R&D
refine its approach to innovation.

Appreciating the unique perspectives and capabilities that other functional and business leaders bring to the table — and tapping their expertise
— is a good way to start breaking down barriers.

“One of the best insights that we had from the
marketing team was around the ‘laws of growth,’
and the realization that the world isn’t out there
waiting for a better Mars bar,” said Ware. “There are
reasons why people don’t buy our products that may
become the barriers: ‘I can’t find it in the store.’ ‘I
can’t afford it.’ ‘I don’t think of it, or it’s not relevant
to me.’ Once you have the clearest possible articulation
from marketing about the opportunities, product
development can get much more to work.”

The ability to learn from other functional leaders requires
both mastery of one’s own area — which earns leaders
the right to contribute at a broader level — and the
self-awareness to seek out the best ideas and approaches
from others, said Robert F. Probst, executive vice president
and CFO of Ventas. “Not everyone brings the same
strengths to the table. By definition, functional leaders
excel in different areas. Teams come to a better result
when the best ideas are actively sought out from different
people. Just as it is critical to know the complementary
sweet spot of peers so those strengths can be leveraged,
it is important to be self-aware, to keep an open mind and
to listen,” he said. “For example, finance professionals,
who might not have a reputation for not being as focused
on softer skills, can learn from other partners like HR.”

View full image

Breaking down barriers:  What leaders can do

Sharing ideas and best practices and improving collaboration
across functions and businesses don’t just
happen. Organizations that do these things best have a
shared vision for the business, maintain a culture that
encourages learning and establish decision frameworks
that ensure collaboration doesn’t result in indecision.

Understand and tap the diverse strengths
and ideas of different disciplines

Appreciating the unique perspectives and capabilities
that other functional and business leaders bring to the
table — and tapping their expertise — is a good way to
start breaking down barriers. For example, our assessments
of the core leadership capabilities of thousands of
functional leaders have shown that IT leaders tend to
excel at driving results and collaboration, while chief
human resources leaders are strongest at developing
organizational capabilities. Beyond the capabilities, functional
leaders also develop a unique view of the business
based on where they sit. Good supply chain leaders have
a great view of the cost of doing business and the implications
of decisions on the product and delivery, while
strong marketing leaders can have the best insight into
how decisions may affect the customer or the brand.
Insights from other functions include the following:

From finance, a focus on ROI and P&L and balance
sheet management, and the insights that drive
investor perceptions

From general management, the discipline of evaluating
issues first from a whole-business lens before
the functional perspective, and a focus on finding
ways to create value

From IT, the ability to “look around corners” and spot
the threats that could transform or disintermediate the
business; agile approaches to rolling out new ideas

From human resources, the drivers of values, behaviors
and performance from a people perspective

From legal, the balancing of risks and rewards

From sales, the specific challenges and needs
of customers

Absolute mastery of their own functions enables leaders to translate between the function and the broader business,
which is critical for promoting understanding, said
Ware. “A key role as functional leaders is translator —
translating what is important to the function in a
vocabulary that the business can use and translating
what’s important to the business or another function into
the vocabulary and actions the function can use,” he said.

Clearly articulate the contribution of each
discipline in the larger business vision

“The most successful companies inspire people to see
how they fit within the larger mission, creating the belief
at all levels of the organization that what you do
matters,” said Pearson. “Whether you’re a developer, an
analyst, a data scientist, whatever, what you do matters
because it has a direct impact on our guests having the
best stay or our employees having the best environment
to work in or our owners loving our brand.”

For functional leaders, aligning with the business
agenda means understanding how the function
impacts the business and whether it’s contributing to
business performance or not.

“If you’re sitting in a function, you have to make sure
that you understand the overall business agenda and are
aligned with it so what you’re actually delivering is really
driving the business objectives, because that’s the only
thing that counts at the end of the day,” said Doug
Baillie, who recently retired as chief human resources
officer of Unilever. In a rolling two-year cycle, Unilever
senior teams helped by HR conduct an audit of talent,
organization, culture, skills and capabilities in their parts
of the organization — be it a geography, category or
function. “We ask: What’s our talent strength? What do
we need to do in the organization? What skills and capabilities
are missing, and what are the things we need to
strengthen from a culture point of view? We map that
against where the business is today and against their
three-year strategic plan,” said Baillie, who came in to
HR from a line leadership role. “From there, we focus on
delivering no more than 10 people actions, which are
owned by the business, in order to make sure what HR
is working on is truly driving that business agenda. It’s
the most powerful tool that I’ve seen for ensuring that
our agenda is really aligned to what the business needs.”

The CEO sets the tone for collaboration by articulating
the vision and demanding business metrics and performance
objectives for functions and business units that
are linked by the shared vision. “The CEO must tailor
communication to each function, demonstrating the
impact of each area on the work of the others and on
the ultimate client. At Siqueira Castro, we have an
all-hands 45-minute meeting every Monday morning,
revisiting what our corporate goals are, what each
major area is doing to achieve them and foster collaboration
and communication. I ask each senior executive
what they will do that week to move us closer to the
goal. This clarifies everybody’s roles, to themselves and
to the others,” said Ferrari.

The CEO also is critical to creating a culture that fosters
an environment of constructive debate, Probst said.
“The CEO needs to be a role model that seeks input
across different areas. He or she needs to seek input
and flip to either side of the table to encourage debate.
The best organizations encourage their leaders to call
each other out if they do not agree on an issue. Equally,
then they need to coalesce and respond with one voice
and with speed once a decision is made. The key to
creating this kind of culture is trust, high performance
in each function and a willingness to collaborate.”

Establish clear decision frameworks

When collaboration becomes consensus — and
everyone has veto power — decisions can be delayed
or perpetually re-debated. A key to effective collaboration
is defining a clear decision framework that articulates
who is responsible for making certain decisions
and who has the right to contribute to or veto a
decision.

“Tensions arise where there is a lack of clarity,” said
Baillie. “In a matrix organization, two things can help.
Firstly, minimize the number of points in the matrix
when decisions get made and be clear who makes
them. Secondly, accept that there will be conflicts and
that conflict is generally healthy. The question is how
conflict is handled when it does arise. Many matrix
organizations suffer because conflicts brew at a very
low level in the organization, rather than being escalated
and resolved. Successful companies quickly
surface and resolve conflicts.”

Ware agreed: “Succeeding today is about speed, so
large companies have to figure out how to reduce the
number of ‘maybes,’” he said. “One of my colleagues
has a great line: ‘I’d like a yes, I can live with a no, what
will kill me is the slow maybe.’ So we’re focused on
avoiding the slow maybe.”

Download

Download

Authors

Thomas T. Daniels

New York

Katie M. Tucker

Atlanta