A Conversation with Troy Young of Hearst

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

A Conversation with Troy Young of Hearst

“To lead change, you have to be able to change the product.”

August 2016

| 5 min read

When Troy Young joined Hearst Magazines as president of Digital Media in
2013, the company was at a crossroads. With brands including Cosmopolitan,
Esquire and Good Housekeeping, the company had a great deal of cachet, but
translating those brands into digital properties was progressing slowly: the
content management system (CMS) was nearing obsolescence, and teams
were siloed and not working harmoniously.

Young had a clear vision and plan to reinvent Hearst Magazines Digital
Media (HMDM). Over the past three years, he has initiated and activated
a sea change in the division, introducing a new philosophy and creating
a new platform that seamlessly integrates marketers’ messages into the
editorial stream. His role encompasses business development, technology
and operations, editorial content and more. The numbers tell the story of
HMDM’s success: Hearst’s 21 brands boasted 162 million unique views
in June 2016, a 24 percent increase over the same period in 2015. It also
undertook several successful launches such as Delish, a website for people
who love food that has skyrocketed to an audience of 11 million UVs and
300 million video views in less than 18 months; LENNY, a partnership
with Girls co-creators Lena Dunham and Jenni Konner; and a collaboration
with Snapchat on a new Discover brand, Sweet. Also, Hearst’s embrace
of off-platform distribution has led to a 47 percent growth in social media
reach, and the company now boasts more than 110 million followers
on Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, Google+, Instagram and YouTube.

Young has a wealth of experience in the digital realm. As
the president of Say Media, he went from selling the
company’s first ad to overseeing more than $100 million
in annual revenue. Prior to Say, Young held several executive
positions at Omnicom’s digital agency Organic,
including the role of chief experience officer, where he
advised on strategy and created award-winning work for
clients including American Express, Virgin Mobile, Sirius
XM, Chrysler and Bank of America. He has held numerous
advisory roles with digital media, mobile and
commerce companies, and currently serves on the
boards of the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) and
Digital Content Next (DCN).

Young took time recently to discuss how he transformed
Hearst into a digitally forward-thinking
company, why he bristles at the title chief digital officer
and how Taylor Swift’s hairstyles inspired a new operating
vision for Hearst.

Spencer Stuart: Given that Hearst was founded in
1887, what made you think the company could be
changed when they asked you to join?

Troy Young: I thought the company could change
because the time is right for change, and because they
had to change. To put it simply, what magazines were
doing in digital wasn’t working.

We talk a lot about what it takes to be a successful
digital change agent. Tell us about what you did at the
beginning of your tenure, when you took some fairly
controversial actions.

We worked very closely with the print editors, including
Joanna Coles at Cosmopolitan and Robbie Myers at ELLE,
to ask hard questions about what a successful media
brand looked like. And then we hired new site editors, and
moved many of them off the print floors. We created
spaces for digital editors to be great at digital.

How was that move received? Were people glad to
have that leadership finally gone, or were they terrified
of a drastic change?

I think there was a little bit of both. It was important that
the editors knew that I really cared about the product. So we had long, thoughtful conversations about why we
weren’t doing what we could be and how it was compromising
our mission. So the control reflex was hard.

We focused on Cosmo to begin with, because I thought it
was the highest potential internet brand. I hired a new
editor and put everyone — the analytics guy, all the graphics
people, everybody — in one room on the 38th floor of
Hearst Tower and said, “Make media.” And the audience
grew from 9 million to 27 million. And what does that do
to a company in transition? It gives them hope.

You mentioned that you didn’t want to be a “chief
digital officer” or have that title. Can you expand on
that a little bit? Why was that title problematic?

Because the scope of that job is really about helping
business units be more successful with digital. To me,
the platform is half of it — and admittedly, it’s a really
important part — but the most important part is the
content and the consumer experience. To lead change,
you have to be able to change the product. And when
you change the product, there has to be material change
in your revenue. So whatever you do, you want to be
able to create quantifiable success in your change effort.
And that’s what we were able to do.

How did you facilitate this change? You
relocated everybody, but did you make other
organizational changes?

We observed that, for example, Taylor Swift would get a
haircut, and life on Earth would stop, and we’d have to
write about it across nine brands. And what we were
doing made no sense. Everyone did their own version.
So we connected our efforts: write one article and then
change the head and ”dek” and the imagery and use it
across the portfolio. We created an efficient approach to
production without compromising the voice of the
brands. Basically, our digital business is now run totally
horizontally, which means 21 brands are run like a single
property and they are all responsible for their voice. But
they all collaborate with data, platforms and content
sharing. And that’s allowed us to continue to grow, to
operate more efficiently, and ultimately make better
content and more money.

You have figured out a way to harness Big Data so
your brands create and capture it. You also built your
own platform. Can you tell us about that?

We used to have a monolithic system that did everything
and did nothing. We got feedback from editors and freelancers
that the system was not easy or intuitive to use,
and it made it difficult to quickly create and publish a
piece of content. Then we found a lightweight content
management system, and decided it would become the
basis for the thing that we branded Media OS, Media
Operating System. So we started building on it, and that
was the beginning of our platform aspirations.

Eventually, we created something called Buzzing at
Hearst: every five seconds, it ranks every piece of
content we publish across newspapers, magazines and
our TV networks based on their performance relative to
an article published from that brand in that same timeframe.
It puts them in a list and it’s like this pulsing
brain inside the company, and any editor can see what’s
doing well in real time. Then they can instantly take a
piece of content anywhere around the world, modify it
and put it up on their site.

And then on the back of that, we started getting more
sophisticated with how we were handling data, so
editors can go in and test images and test headlines, so
they can optimize performance before they put it up on
social. So having that platform vision is really important.

Basically, our digital business is now run totally horizontally, which means 21 brands are run like a single property.

Troy Young,

President of Digital Media, Hearst Magazines

With regards to talent, how are you looking at rounding
out your team as you create this global platform?

It depends on which part of the organization you’re
looking at. For the longest time, getting good tech talent
and tech leadership was very difficult. It wasn’t until we
started to develop the reputation as a place that
embraced real rigorous thinking around technology that
we were able to get new leadership and recruit the right
kind of people. Personally, I would say it’s not about a
single person — it’s not just about an editor or a product
person or a technologist. It’s about a lot of people
working together. So I really look for passionate human
beings who can work together. And I think because of
our reputation now in the market, we’re able to get
better talent.

Download

Download