Board Structure and Composition

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Board Structure and Composition

The Public Company Series, by NYSE and J.P. Morgan

In a rapidly evolving business landscape, public companies must prioritize dynamic governance to thrive and navigate new risks. Effective governance involves a range of considerations, including strong leadership, effective collaboration and communication with the CEO and executive team, a strong mix of expertise and perspective, and a strategic approach to board refreshment.

Two new chapters, authored by Spencer Stuart’s George Anderson, Jason Baumgarten and Julie Daum, are included in the guide on Board Structure and Composition, which is part of The Public Company Series by J.P. Morgan and the NYSE.

Download both chapters

New Chapters

Formal board turnover policies combined with other refreshment tools and regular board assessments help ensure the board has the right mix of directors to effectively oversee the CEO and leadership team while advocating for shareholders.

Tenure limits and retirement ages

Tenure limits and mandatory retirement ages are useful tools to help boards evolve, but they should not be the sole mechanisms for board refreshment. Top-performing boards are strategic and deliberate about building a multi-year succession plan for the board’s makeup that enables them to bring in exceptional talent.

Read Chapter 32

Board, committee and director assessments

High-performing boards approach evaluation thoughtfully, creating mechanisms to identify strengths, weaknesses, and growth areas to meet the organization’s evolving needs. While these mechanisms may change, their core objective is to provide clear performance assessments, highlight areas for improvement, and foster a culture of continuous development for board refreshment.

Read Chapter 33

Related Insights

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: Board Refreshment and Director Succession Planning

Spencer Stuart’s March 2025 pulse survey looks at the critical topic of board refreshment and succession planning.

Read more

Three Topics on U.S. Board Directors’ Minds in 2025

CEOs and boards face more uncertainty than nearly anyone can remember. From geopolitics to AI, C-suites and boards are navigating a high level of short-term uncertainty while also trying to keep an eye on medium- and longer-term goals.

Read more

Corporate Secretaries: How to Get the Most from Your Third-Party Board Review

We've compiled best practices and practical tips to help corporate secretaries help their board achieve a great outcome from third-party assessments.

Read more