Staying Local While Going Global

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Staying Local While Going Global

New Zealand Leaders on Their Priorities for 2016 and Beyond

August 2016

| 5 min read

To get a sense of New Zealand’s business mood, we
recently surveyed a number of the country’s senior
executives and board members across a wide range
of industries. Our study explores the critical issues
facing New Zealand, and how executives would
address them via talent and leadership strategies.
Despite the typical increased interest in globalisation, a
surprisingly high percentage told us that growth within
New Zealand’s borders is crucial to their business.
They also said keeping and attracting talent is a key
part of staying relevant and that they see disruption
less as a threat and more as an opportunity.

To find these results, Spencer Stuart surveyed senior
executives and board members in many different
businesses. We received 91 responses, 75 percent
of whom were board members and CEOs.

Local growth opportunities

Interestingly, New Zealand companies prioritize growth in their native land over expanding
their reach globally. When asked where they see the greatest opportunities for growth in the
near term, 44 percent said organic growth in New Zealand is the most important path,
compared with 32 percent who listed overseas development. Twenty-four percent of New
Zealand leaders say mergers and acquisitions offers the most potential for business growth.

These findings could be seen several ways: Indeed, it’s critical for companies to develop a
strong base in their own country from which to expand. But others find the local emphasis a
little troubling, perhaps displaying a certain level of myopia.

What really surprised me about the survey results was how inwardly focused we are in New Zealand! This is a major concern considering our relatively limited domestic market. I would have expected the majority of companies to have some sort of targeted innovation off shore.

Chief Executive Officer,

New Zealand aviation company

The importance of forward-thinking

Staying abreast of information-technology advancements is a crucial concern for New
Zealand executives: 67 percent list advances in information technology/disruptors in the
marketplace as the top short-term trend. That’s almost exactly twice the next two trends,
changes in regulatory policies and sustained volatility of global economies, which both had
34 percent. “With our millennial customers, we must be flexible and nimble with our digital
marketing solutions to keep ahead of the competition,” said the managing director of a
New Zealand brewery. Next on the list are slowing economic growth in countries like China
and the U.S. (27 percent), and consolidation of businesses through mergers/acquisitions
(24 percent).

We feel we are in a good position to do the disrupting! For example, we don’t have an extensive on-the-ground footprint compared to our competitors in some key growth markets and we believe we can rapidly expand using new means to reach consumers. We have a clear digital strategy.

Chief Executive Officer,

Dairy company

Being prepared for the digital age

Clearly the digital age is no longer approaching — it’s here. But staying abreast of the most
recent digital/technological trends is still a large concern for New Zealanders — 49 percent
listed it as a new area of expertise their boards may require. “Instead of being afraid of
disruption, we have embraced digital innovation and we try and stay one step ahead of our
competition,” said the managing director of one financial services administration company.

Digital is front of mind for boards. It is a key focus on three of the four boards I’m currently on.

Board member and chairman,

Specialized retail chain

That number was more than double the next three areas: international diversity (23 percent),
commercial expertise (22 percent) and industry-specific concerns (21 percent). Two other
recruiting priorities, gender diversity (18 percent) and risk/governance expertise (16
percent), round out the list.

The high percentage of boards prioritizing digital/technological expertise is no surprise —
in an ever-changing business environment, no one wants to be left behind with yesterday’s
technology. But what may be surprising is the emphasis placed on diversity — individually,
the numbers of those two categories don’t look overly impressive. But combined, the
demand for gender and international diversity total 41 percent, not far below the need for
directors with digital/technological focus.

Diversity of views is a must at the board table, if we don’t have these, it is likely over time we will lose our competitiveness. Counteracting group think is a significant challenge on boards. So it is not so much about fixing gender diversity but even a broader level with diversity of thinking.

Board member and chairman,

Specialized retail chain

Keeping up with global transformation

The relentless pace of global change is one clear reason New Zealand leaders place a high
emphasis on strategic planning and business development: 65 percent said this was the
most important technical competency for senior leadership teams. Casting an eye toward
the business’s future was also seen as a key step, with 45 percent of leaders saying
organization development and succession planning is the most crucial quality. Other
important technical competencies include: commercial understanding (34 percent) and
financial management and capital allocation (26 percent), risk assessment and
management (24 percent) and supply chain management (18 percent).

Digital in the property sector has become more of a focus — it is a balancing act to incorporate mandatory regulatory requirements while ensuring ease of access for clients. We must have real time data so clients can see the underlying value of their portfolio at any time of their choosing.

Head of funds management,

Investment firm

The customer is king

Thirty-eight percent of New Zealand’s leaders say understanding customer preferences is
the most important skill that senior leadership teams can display. “Five years ago,
‘customer mindset’ was a secondary consideration to a board,” said a board member and
chairman of a specialized retail chain. “But now it is front and center, and decision-making
revolves around the customer.”

As previously mentioned, New Zealand leaders also want to ensure they’re ready to align
their businesses around transformation: 38 percent of the executives we surveyed said the
ability to lead change is the key capability. Other desired leadership skills include building
capability and commercial orientation (31 percent), strategic thinking (30 percent),
leading people (29 percent), and collaborating and influencing and driving results both
earned 27 percent.

We are now a large international company, however we have kept a culture that is nimble, flexible and most importantly strongly customer focused. We feel we are pretty good at working with our customers to find innovative solutions in each geography we work in.

Managing director,

Financial services administration company

Finding the right talent

For New Zealand executives, attracting and keeping the right people is front and center
when they prioritize personnel needs. When asked the most important human capital
imperatives, a combined 65 percent responded that attracting (40 percent) and retaining
top talent (25 percent) came first. Ironically, despite New Zealand’s emphasis on staying
local, the need to attract strong talent relates to the desire to have a larger global impact:

Our most important growth opportunities are offshore in particular in Asia. Talent development and leadership experience is therefore critical to our success.

Managing director,

New Zealand dairy company

Other human capital imperatives include: Fostering cross-functional collaboration (36
percent), strengthening the top leadership team and transforming the organizational
culture (35 percent), developing new organizational models (27 percent), and improving
training and development (23 percent).

The war for outstanding human capital is a massive issue, which seems to be getting harder each year. Really good people are hard to find and retain, particularly when you are trying to grow in countries like China and India.

Director, special projects,

New Zealand dairy company

Download

Download