How Hotel Executives Can Succeed in Cross-Cultural Assignments

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

How Hotel Executives Can Succeed in Cross-Cultural Assignments

By

Jerry Noonan

Global Hotel Network

August 2016

| 2 min read

Author

Jerry Noonan

Boston

Many multinational hotel companies prefer to groom or hire local executives for key leadership roles, but they still need to deploy senior executives from other countries for a variety of reasons: There will be scenarios when highly specific expertise is needed, for instance. Other times, there may be a shortage of local talent with the requisite management experience, or a CEO and board may want to develop senior leaders who demonstrate global perspective and a capability for leading across cultures by appointing them to foreign leadership roles. For the leader who is tapped for a cross-border assignment, it is a significant move, both personally and professionally.

Based on our extensive work with globally minded organizations and discussions with several executives who have successfully transitioned to cross-border roles, we’ve identified ways you can ensure the benefits of your international experience last long after the assignment is over.

Be realistic in your expectations

At the outset of your assignment, you and the organization must be clear about the expectations of the role and its longer-term career implications. Some executives assume a promotion is waiting for them at the end of an international assignment, but the right opening may not yet exist when they are ready to return.

“It’s best to avoid considering an international posting as just a step on a ladder,” said Keith Barr, chief commercial officer of International Hotels Group and previously CEO of Greater China for the company. “It is better to set the expectation that embarking on a cross-cultural journey will forever make the individual a more broad-minded person and a more interesting and adaptable executive.”

Make the first 100 days count

Once you are settled in your new environment, making the right first impression in the organization can set the tone for the remainder of the assignment. Success in the first 100 days will embolden you and your employees to confidently set the course for the rest of the journey. You should learn the local business issues as quickly as possible — it’s common for executives to discover that the manner of business transactions, the style of negotiating, how customers make buying decisions and the protocols of business meetings may be quite different from their home countries. Local regulatory and government policies will also vary — in multi-country or multi-divisional organizations, each entity may have different cultural norms and may vary significantly in their economic development. Thus, getting early advice from colleagues on the ground is key.

Think about the big picture

Despite the difficulties that may arise, stay focused on the role an international assignment plays in your overall career story. You likely accepted the assignment because it provided opportunities for growth and development, such as specific market expertise or general management exposure. Don’t let everyday pressures prevent you from amassing the professional and personal experiences you came to build.

Maximize the experience

An international assignment can have profound and lasting effects that transcend your career. Interestingly, every one of the 25 global executives we spoke with said the international assignments benefited them personally. Some witnessed their children becoming global citizens after enrolling them in international schools, while others found sharing enriching experiences strengthened their bonds with their partners.

Prepare for challenges going home

Some people find it hard to re-acclimate to their home countries after an international assignment. One executive advised expats to relocate to a new location upon returning to their home country, reasoning that they would have less in common with friends who have not experienced other cultures. One international executive from Sao Paulo who lived in Asia and London said he experienced this disconnect, noting, “I still have friends from Sao Paulo, but I just don’t have as much in common with them as someone who has also lived in remote parts of the world. It’s a more relevant and interesting, common experience.”

Conclusion

International assignments have high stakes for both the individual leader and the organization. If you set realistic expectations, learn local business practices quickly and strive to maximize your experience, you can turn a cross-border assignment into a journey of long-term success.

Originally published in Perspectives at Global Hotel Network.com.

Author

Jerry Noonan

Boston