How to Think About Assessing Leaders

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

How to Think About Assessing Leaders

August 2016

| 8 min read

Accurately predicting which executives will succeed in a
senior leadership role and which will not is critical, but
challenging for most organizations.

What makes these high-stakes decisions so challenging?
First, they require a determination of whether an executive
can succeed in a new leadership context, one that is likely
larger in scope, more highly dynamic and vastly more complex
than previous roles. Traditional assessment approaches
weren’t designed to predict whether an individual has the
ability to stretch beyond his or her current capabilities to
grow successfully into a new job and change along with
it and the organization.

Furthermore, executives at this level are highly accomplished.
As a group, they score high on general intelligence tests,
averaging in the 85th percentile or better. Since they were not
designed specifically to assess executives, such tests lack the
precision to illuminate differences among good, great and
exceptional leaders. Top-level executives speak compellingly
about their capabilities and experience. They are driven to
influence others, and often are quite good at it. This combination
makes for capable leaders, but also makes comprehensive,
accurate assessment an extremely difficult task.

So how can organizations improve their ability to make the
most critical senior leadership decisions? Which assessment
approaches provide the kind of insights that increase confidence
in decisions about which executives to select and develop for the
organization’s most important leadership roles?

As executive search and leadership advisers for 60
years, we have observed and studied leadership in different
contexts and have developed a view on how to help
clients think about the role of leadership in their organizations
and how to select and develop the senior
executives able to make a lasting positive impact on the
business. In this article, we will explore the characteristics
of the most effective executive assessments and
how we have developed an assessment approach that
draws on those principles to overcome the key deficiencies
in standard methodologies, allowing us to provide
the rich insight needed to make the most important
leadership decisions.

Driving deeper insight: characteristics of the best assessments

The most effective assessments address the weaknesses
of traditional assessment approaches. Specifically, the
most insightful assessments do the following:

Measure the capabilities that are central to effective
executive leadership. Thousands of tools exist to assess
people on all sorts of dimensions — from IQ to personality
to professional competencies. Not all approaches
are effective: To start, you need a method tailored to the
unique nature of the person being assessed. In the case
of business leaders, the acid test is whether a method
truly predicts executive performance.

The role of leadership in an organization is to continually
scan the external environment to see what could
affect the business, and drive results over the long-term
through people — the senior team and the broader
organization. To do this, senior-level executives draw on
a core set of leadership capabilities, regardless of their
role, industry or geography. An effective assessment
scores leaders on these critical capabilities against an
objective scale, so that individuals can be compared to
one another and to the required degree of competence
for a given role.

Consider the relevant leadership context. Most people
can recall examples in which the same person, with
similar mandates executed more or less the same way,
was a spectacular success in one situation and an
outright failure in another. How can this be? It turns out
that context matters; how well an individual leader will
perform is related in no small part to how well his or her
capabilities, leadership style and expertise align with the
demands of the specific role. Therefore, an executive
assessment must be based on a sound understanding
of the leadership context.

Evaluate future potential with a developmental lens.
Demonstrated capabilities represent just part of the
story when it comes to assessing executives. That’s
because accumulated knowledge and relationships
become less effective tools for accomplishing business
objectives and navigating the challenges leaders will encounter as they move higher in an organization. As
the context changes, executives must make sense of a
much wider set of issues with less concrete information,
and then conceptualize a clear plan and inspire, engage
and motivate a large organization to act. For these
reasons, an assessment should provide insight into an
individual’s capacity to develop new capabilities and
respond to changing leadership demands and evolving
business conditions and priorities.

The best assessment approaches are predicated on the
idea that each person has the potential to continue to
develop and enhance performance. When conducted
with a developmental lens, assessments will be viewed
as valuable by those being evaluated, improving engagement
and increasing the likelihood that executives will
apply developmental feedback.

Embrace multiple methods for precision. Research and
common sense show clearly that one assessment
method is never enough, particularly for senior executives.
No matter how insightful the tool, not everyone
responds to it. Nor can any one tool illuminate all the critical
aspects of leadership. An effective assessment
employs a range of methodologies to evaluate an executive
from multiple angles and perspectives, going deep to
illuminate aspects of the person such as their motivation,
values and personality in addition to capabilities and knowledge. Combining executive-tailored, experience-
based interviews, interpersonal style questionnaires,
live-case-based demonstrations, 360-degree referencing
and/or surveys improves the overall accuracy of an
assessment and provides the inputs for rich, comprehensive
and powerful insight into the person.

The Spencer Stuart assessment approach: proven link to performance

The foundation of an effective assessment is a comprehensive
view of the role of executive leadership in an
organization, and the factors that shape specific leadership
requirements. Integrating the vast research on
leadership performance, we have developed a framework
for thinking about what leadership does for an
organization and the kind of person needed to lead in
given contexts. Our model looks at:

The organizational context: the near-term and long-term
critical demands and constraints from the
team, organization and business environment to
which a leader must respond

Character and interpersonal style: the kind of person
he or she is; the nature of the person, his or her
emotional drives, values and leadership style, all of
which are important when considering alignment
with an organization’s culture

Current and potential capability: the knowledge, skills
and deeper characteristics that make up the overall
competence of a leader relative to a role

Leadership outcomes: the various outcomes expected
of a leader based on the intersection of the person’s
character and capability in context

Applying this framework, we have developed an assessment
approach for leadership decisions with the highest
stakes. It provides uniquely comprehensive insight about
executives’ character and capability relative to their peers
and in the context in which they will have to operate.
Furthermore, the caliber of our people, our methods and
our integrated approach to assessment, combine to
substantially increase the accuracy with which we can
predict a leader’s success.

In-depth market and assessment experience, at the senior executive level

Even the most sophisticated tools and processes will
fail to deliver without the expertise of well-qualified
assessment professionals. As a search firm, we know
this better than most. Our assessment teams are
distinguished by three key features:

Our understanding of CEO and executive
leadership

Our business and market knowledge — industries,
regions and markets

Our dedicated assessment experts

OUR ASSESSMENT APPROACH:

Leadership Capability Framework: Six core capabilities

Derived from research into more than 140 assessment models and our assessments of tens of thousands of
executives, we have isolated six capabilities that are critical to leadership performance. We consistently benchmark
executives on the following capabilities, as well as other more specialized ones according to client needs.
We continue to develop capabilities as the nature of leadership evolves.

Our development-focused assessments are led by dedicated
consultants who do only assessment, not search.
They bring rigorous, insightful objectivity to the task,
coupled with broad and in-depth knowledge about
senior leadership performance. With numerous
advanced degrees in psychology and assessment, our
assessors have extensive experience at the intersection
of business and psychology — and their skills are
further honed by constant application and calibration
among colleagues, both on projects and off.

We also believe market insight is a critical perspective in
assessing executives. By pairing expert assessors and
search consultants who know the industry and market
well, we can say not just whether an executive is objectively
competent, but how they stand relative to their
peers in similar roles. We can provide unique insight
into whether someone is unusually good relative to the
market — that is, how hard it would be to find someone
better. For example, if a company were to require a
unique combination of financial expertise, business experience, leadership ability, and fluency in Hungarian
and Mandarin, there may be only one candidate — at
most! Developing an internal candidate, or choosing
one who has gaps but potential, may work better than
spending time and resources seeking an external candidate
who is unaffordable or, at worst, does not exist.
Providing real choice beyond the basic résumé is possible
when you have a fully rounded assessment.

An executive-specific methodology that evaluates a person’s past, current ability and future potential

Our assessment methods and tools were built for business.
We begin by working with clients to define the
specific strategic context in which the executive must
operate to be successful. This involves identifying the
strategic business priorities as well as the leadership
goals for the specific role with measurable performance
outcomes, the specific tasks and behaviors required, the
preferred leadership style and the necessary capabilities.

Our Leadership Capabilities Framework provides an
objective set of scaled business leadership capabilities
with which we can compare any one executive to any
other. The average of this scale is the average executive;
the top levels are calibrated to surface distinctions
even among outstanding top leaders of the largest
global companies.

We look not only at past experience and current capability,
but also future potential. A core tool we use to get at
an individual’s potential is our Executive Intelligence
(ExI®) assessment, which targets the characteristics that
specifically predict executive capability and business
impact. We do not squeeze executives into a narrow
band at the top of a scale, as with IQ, where executives
lie almost entirely in the upper 10-15 percent; we developed
an entire scale uniquely for them. This proprietary
approach is the only one proven to predict executive
development and performance over time. We’ve shown,
for example, that C-level executives with high levels of
Executive Intelligence were promoted 22 percent faster
over the course of their careers. Put simply, when we
combine these tools with other capability and style
assessments, we can evaluate executives on what they
have done, what they can do, where they can do it best
and where they can go long-term.

OUR ASSESSMENT APPROACH:

Executive Intelligence

Executive Intelligence, or ExI®, is Spencer Stuart’s proven, proprietary measure of senior-level potential. Over the
last decade, we have found that three dimensions of Executive Intelligence predict not only the speed of promotion
for senior executives, but also the performance of business two years after a CEO takes the role. They measure a
leader’s potential to develop true executive capability, and how fast it can be done. Executive Intelligence is evaluated
through an executive-level case that allows the individual to demonstrate thinking abilities in real time and in
an unfamiliar context, removing personal experience from the situation to get to deeper traits.

The three areas of Executive Intelligence are:

Critical and Conceptual Thinking:
Questioning assumptions, anticipating consequences,
judging the value of actions

Interpersonal and Social Awareness:
Recognizing and responding to emotional states,
anticipating reactions to a situation

Self-Evaluation and Adjustment:
Accepting new information, comparing it to existing
information, and taking action on it

We also consider a leader’s character and personal style
and how they fit with the needs of the business and the
organizational culture. Our approach to assessing culture
enables us to measure executives’ cultural impact and
alignment and provide practical insights on specific leadership
and cultural development opportunities. It is
rooted in the insight that each organization and each
individual must address the inherent tension between
two critical dimensions of organizational dynamics:
attitude toward people (from independence to interdependence)
and attitude toward change (from flexibility
to stability).

OUR ASSESSMENT APPROACH:

Organizational Culture

An organization’s culture can support or undermine its business
strategy. We help clients assess the alignment of culture and strategy,
establish a target culture and evaluate the degree to which
executives are likely to fit with, adapt to and shape culture.

Our framework for assessing culture is rooted in the insight
that each organization and each individual must address the
inherent tension between two critical dimensions of
organizational dynamics:

Attitude toward people, from independence to interdependence

Attitude toward change, from flexibility to stability

Applying this fundamental insight, we have identified eight
primary and universal styles, which can be used to diagnose
highly complex and diverse behavioral patterns in a culture
and understand how an individual executive is likely to align
with that culture. Because the model uses the same language
to characterize culture and individual styles, assessment of
cultural alignment is straightforward and actionable.

Because they are conducted by assessment
experts who truly understand the demands of
executive leadership, our assessments focus on
the developmental potential of the individual,
providing specific feedback to help evolve the
person’s leadership style and capabilities.

An integrated suite of tools: providing multiple perspectives and concrete developmental insight in the relevant context

Having good tools and good people is essential,
but even then they can fail if not used together
the right way. We bring our dedicated teams and
suite of tools together in an approach defined by
multiple perspectives and cross validation of
results, which enables us to focus on the developmental
potential of the executive. Our skilled
assessors synthesize the results of multiple separate
tools into a higher-order insight about the
whole person that is truly greater than the sum of
the parts. This allows us to provide comprehensive
insight into executives as they are today and
as they can be in the future. In a very real sense,
we help people find and achieve their best destiny.

Download

Download