Corporate Secretaries: How to Get the Most from Your Third-Party Board Review

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

Corporate Secretaries: How to Get the Most from Your Third-Party Board Review

By

George Anderson,

Jennifer L. Herrmann and

Jill W. Kernan

May 2025

| 4 min read

Authors

George Anderson

Boston

Jennifer L. Herrmann

Philadelphia

Jill W. Kernan

Philadelphia

SectionsIn this article

The corporate secretary1  can be a subtle powerhouse in helping boards get the most from their annual self-evaluation, particularly when it includes an outside adviser. From helping plan the assessment, to ensuring it is delivered with impact and assisting the board with follow-up action, the corporate secretary plays an outsized role in successful board reviews.

Boards are increasingly turning to outside advisers to conduct their annual assessments. According to the U.S. Spencer Stuart Board Index, 28 percent of S&P 500 boards in 2024 reported engaging an independent third party for their evaluation processes, a substantial rise from 9 percent five years earlier. Boards’ actual use of outside advisers is likely even higher, given that disclosures of their use are voluntary, and many boards retain an outside adviser every other or every third year. The use of advisers for board evaluation is likely a third or more of the S&P 500 and continues to rise.

The corporate secretary often plays a pivotal role in working with outside advisers. Yet little practical advice is available on how best to do so. Drawing on insights gained from working with hundreds of corporate secretaries, we’ve compiled best practices and practical tips to help you help your board achieve a great outcome.

1 We use the term “corporate secretary” throughout to refer to the member of the legal function who works most closely with the board. In practice, this individual may be the general counsel, chief legal officer, corporate secretary or other legal executive.

Download

Download

Before the assessment

Design a more meaningful review

The corporate secretary can support the board, likely via the nominating and governance committee, in designing a more effective process tailored to the specific needs of the board. Too often, the committee and corporate secretary default to what was done in the past — and what was done in the past may not have been all that substantive.
The most effective reviews are shaped by three questions: What do we need from the board evaluation going forward? What is the best approach to achieve that? Who is best suited to lead it?

The responses to these questions can help shape a more effective evaluation that prioritizes specific dimensions of board performance, such as:

Board composition and skills needed in the future

Meeting effectiveness and quality of board dialogue

Strategic alignment and decision-making processes

Board oversight of capital allocation decisions

A strong and healthy relationship with management

By engaging with the board or committee chair ahead of time and soliciting input on relevant topics for their assessment, you can ensure that the board gets the most of the review. In fact, many companies create an annual agenda item for nominating and governance committees to discuss potential topics for the self-assessment as well as whether to use an external adviser.

Select the right adviser

Typically, the nominating and governance committee reviews potential advisers and either makes a recommendation to the board on which to engage or engages the adviser directly. While many firms and individuals may offer these services, few have the depth of experience and specialized focus that most boards expect. Further, the interpersonal dynamics with the advisory team leader can enhance or constrain the success of the project.

You can support the committee in making the right choice by doing the following:

Provide suggestions. As corporate secretary, you are likely familiar with potential advisers and can solicit input from peers at other companies to understand their strengths and weaknesses. You also can remind committee members who the board has had good experience with in the past. Ultimately, your goal should be to recommend one or two advisers representing the best fit with the board’s needs.

Assess proposals. You can ensure the committee gains a thorough understanding of the experience and capabilitiy of potential advisers through questions such as: How many engagements of this type have they completed in your region in the last two years? Who will be the project lead and what role will that individual play in interviewing directors and writing the report? What other work does that individual do? Is she or he also dedicated to this type of work or also providing other unrelated client services?

Check references. Ask for and check the boardroom references of potential advisers. Advisers may not be able to identify all their clients for confidentiality reasons, but they should provide the names of individuals who they have worked with recently on similar engagements.

Accelerate decision-making. The board ultimately selects its own adviser, but you can help clarify options and accelerate decision-making by sharing your views on which advisory team is both most qualified and demonstrates the right interpersonal skills for your board.

During the assessment

Define roles

The corporate secretary is often responsible for initiating the engagement, while a designated board leader, typically the board chair or nominating and governance committee chair, maintains close communication with the advisory team leader during the engagement. This board/committee leader(s) provides essential context, including the current dynamics of the board, desired outcomes and any critical issues the consultant should be aware of. The corporate secretary largely focuses on operational aspects, such as processes, timelines and deliverables, although some may also advise on context and board dynamics.

Create and stick to a project plan

Working closely with the adviser and nominating and governance committee, you can ensure there is a detailed project plan that outlines the timeline, key milestones and deliverables. The plan should include relevant touchpoints throughout the process, allowing for regular updates and feedback. The corporate secretary typically asks the advisory team to draft this document, which all parties should agree to and stick with.

Leverage the adviser’s expertise

Another way you can enhance the review process is by ensuring the board utilizes the extensive experience of the board adviser. The adviser has likely conducted dozens of similar evaluations and has useful insights about best practices and methodologies, including the use of online surveys, one-on-one interviews and individual director reviews. While the board may want to preserve some elements of its prior assessment process, the introduction of an external adviser can be an appropriate time to try a novel or alternative approach. The adviser can provide valuable guidance on the nuances of differing approaches to elicit constructive feedback.

After the assessment

Follow up on recommendations

Corporate secretaries also play an important role in helping the board create an action plan based on the recommendations from the consultant — and ensuring it’s carried out. Establishing a timeline to revisit the outcomes of the self-evaluation periodically throughout the year can help keep the board on track. For instance, scheduling a check-in meeting with the nominating and governance committee and external adviser can help maintain accountability and focus.

Reflect and improve

After the evaluation process concludes, make sure to debrief with the advisory team and board leaders. What worked well and what could be improved in future evaluations? Reflecting on the efficacy of the review helps reinforce best practices for future engagements and strengthens your role. It can also serve as helpful input into recommendations for the nominating and governance committee around when to engage an adviser again; for example, the most common timing among our clients is every other year or every third year.

• • •

Effective collaboration between the corporate secretary, nominating and governance committee, and a third-party consultant can significantly enhance the board’s annual self-evaluation. By establishing strong communication, adhering to a clear project plan, leveraging expertise and fostering an open environment for feedback, you can elevate your influence and stature with the board and help the board get the maximum benefit from its annual self-evaluation.

Authors

George Anderson

Boston

Jennifer L. Herrmann

Philadelphia

Jill W. Kernan

Philadelphia

Related Insights

Spencer Stuart Director Pulse Survey: Individual Director Assessments

2 min read

Spencer Stuart's pulse survey of directors on public company boards found that a growing number of boards are using individual assessments to improve their effectiveness.

2025 U.S. Spencer Stuart Board Index

Now in its 40th year, the U.S. Spencer Stuart Board Index examines the latest data and trends in board composition, board governance practices and director compensation among S&P 500 companies.

The General Counsel’s Role in Supporting Board Excellence

3 min read

Ways general counsel can elevate their work with boards in onboarding new directors, supporting the board evaluation, and sourcing and recruiting new directors.

We use analytics cookies that help us enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Please click on the "Accept all cookies" button to help us improve your user experience.

If you would like to know more about our use of cookies, click here.

Accept all cookies Allow only essential cookies
Manage preferences

Privacy Preference Center

When you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More information
Allow All Manage Consent Preferences

Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always Active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Performance Cookies

Performance Cookies

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

Functional Cookies

Functional Cookies

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

Targeting Cookies

Targeting Cookies

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by such partners to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store personal information directly but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Back ButtonPerformance Cookies

Search Icon
Filter Icon

Clear checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Consent Leg.Interest
Switch Label label
Switch Label label
Switch Label label

Reject All Save My Preferences