The Secrets of Success

Skip to Main Content

View All Results

Search

The Secrets of Success

By

Sally Elliott

May 2025

| 2 min read

Author

Sally Elliott

London

To understand the DNA of a truly successful CEO it pays to listen to a wide range of voices, writes Sally Elliott.

One of the privileges of my job as a leadership advisor is hearing the career stories of retail CEOs at the top of their game. I’m interested in how they started their journey, the pivotal moments that enabled them to progress, and what they have learned along the way.

At Spencer Stuart we gather a great deal of information that informs our understanding of individual leaders, but the most valuable insights often come from the recommendations and “off-the-record” views from people who have worked closely with them – including line managers, peers, direct reports, board members, investors, suppliers and even competitors.

If you are looking to develop your readiness for a top leadership position, here are some observations on how the most accomplished leaders think and act, together with a few words of advice:

From strategy to results

The best CEOs think strategically and have a steady flow of ideas to improve the business, even if these run counter to current ways of working. They study and anticipate the future direction of the industry and are prepared to make radical changes, as Simon Wolfson has done, pivoting Next away from stores and catalogue to become a product and platform business.

When Regis Schultz divested many non-core businesses to focus on the JD brand, he was making a clear strategic decision to reduce complexity and identify just a few priorities that were going to make the biggest difference – something that every executive must get good at if they are to meet and exceed objectives.

Leading people and change

Outstanding leaders have honed their influencing skills and are able to convince others to change what they are doing and adopt new ways of working. They create an inclusive working environment where everyone has the opportunity to contribute and fulfil their potential.

As a leader it is your role to hire first-rate people and build strong teams in which individual members achieve a higher level of performance by working together effectively. When the time comes to deliver tough messages, do so with empathy and kindness.

Individual development

Curiosity is an essential quality in a leader and the very best continually feed their appetite for learning. The highly experienced chair of a leading retailer, for example, regularly attends courses to deepen his understanding of topics affecting the business, the latest being on AI.

The path to CEO these days can be circuitous; executives who have a solid grasp of the entire business ecosystem increasingly stand out from their peers. They will have embraced career moves that took them out of their comfort zone, such as working in another area of the business, moving into a different function or taking up an appointment overseas. And when they suffered a setback, they used that experience to make them stronger.

Seeking out opportunities to work with different consumers, channels, contexts or even sectors will greatly enhance your knowledge and expertise. As you discover where your strengths and weaknesses lie, be sure to surround yourself with people who will give you sound, honest feedback; acting on it will help you grow and make you more effective.

Personal values

It hardly needs saying that working hard and inspiring others to do likewise is an indispensable quality in a leader. However, what really captures my attention is people who place ambition for their organisation above their own career interests. Personal integrity is the foundation on which everything else is built.

Sally Elliott co-leads Spencer Stuart’s Global Retail Practice and chairs the World Retail Congress Advisory Board.

This article was first published in Retail Week magazine.

Author

Sally Elliott

London

Related Insights

A Question of Leadership

Sally Elliott reflects on the events of 2024 and shares her insights into the demands on top retailers.

In conversation with Régis Schultz

6 min read

Régis Schultz sets the scene ahead of the World Retail Congress in London this May.

Great leadership is about how you make people feel

2 min read

Sally Elliott explains why operating under intense scrutiny while still treating others with respect and humanity is the mark of a fine leader.